First part of the ingenious gentleman Don Quixote de la Mancha
First chapter. About the condition and exercise of the famous gentleman
Don Quijote of La Mancha
In a place in La Mancha, whose name I don't want to remember, not long ago
time that a nobleman of the spear in the shipyard lived, ancient shield,
skinny nag and running greyhound. A pot of something more cow than ram,
splashing most nights, duels and losses on Saturdays, lantejas the
Friday, some additional palomino on Sundays, they consumed the three
parts of his estate. The rest of them concluded the dress to watch you, leggings of
hairy for the holidays, with his slippers of the same, and the days of
weekdays he honored himself with his finest fleece. He had a
a mistress who was over forty, and a niece who was under twenty,
and a porter and farm boy, who thus saddled the nag as he took the
pruning shear. Our hidalgo's age was approaching fifty; It was from
strong complexion, dry meat, lean face, great early riser and friend
Of hunting. They mean that he had the nickname of Quijada, or Quesada,
that in this there is some difference in the authors who in this case write;
although, by plausible conjectures, it is understood that it was called
Complain. But this matters little to our story; it is enough that in the narration
do not get a point out of the truth.
It is, then, to know that this aforementioned gentleman, the moments that he was
idle, which were the most of the year, read chivalric books with
so much fondness and taste, that he almost forgot the exercise of the
hunting, and even the administration of his estate. And his curiosity got so bad
and folly in this, who sold many hanegas of sowing land to
buy chivalric books to read, and thus took home all
how many could there be of them; and of all, none seemed as good as
those composed by the famous Feliciano de Silva, because the clarity of his
prose and those intricate reasons of his seemed pearl to him, and more
when he got to read those compliments and challenge letters, where in
many parts was written: The reason for the unreason that to my reason is
makes my reason so thin that I rightly complain about the
your beauty. And also when he read: ... the high heavens that
your divinity divinely with the stars fortify you, and make you
deserving of the merit your greatness deserves.
For these reasons the poor gentleman lost his senses, and
understand them and unravel the meaning, that he did not take it out or
would understand Aristotle himself, if he were resurrected for just that. Was not
very well with the wounds that Don Belianís gave and received, because he
imagined that, no matter how great teachers had cured him, he would not stop
have the face and whole body full of scars and marks. But with
everything, praised its author for finishing his book with the promise of that
endless adventure, and many times the desire came to him to take up the pen and dalle
end to the letter, as promised there; and without a doubt I would,
and even get away with it, if other greater and continuous thoughts did not
get in the way. He had many times competition with the priest of his place - who was
a learned man, graduated from Sigüenza-, on which had been a better gentleman:
Palmerín de Ingalaterra or Amadís de Gaula; but Master Nicolás, barber of the
same people, said that no one reached the Knight of Phoebus, and that if
Some could be compared to him, it was Don Galaor, brother of Amadís de Gaula,
because he had a very well-off condition for everything; that he was not a gentleman
finicky, not as whiny as his brother, and that when it comes to bravery he doesn't
lagged behind.
Resolutely, he became so engrossed in his readiness that he was
nights reading from clear to clear, and days from cloudy to cloudy; and so,
from little sleep and a lot of reading, his brain dried up, so he came
to lose your mind. His fantasy was filled with everything he read in the
books, both enchantments and quarrels, battles, challenges,
wounds, compliments, loves, storms and impossible nonsense; and
was so settled in his imagination that all this was true.
machine of those dreamed-of inventions that he read, which for him did not
there was another more true story in the world. He said that the Cid Ruy Díaz
he had been a very good gentleman, but that had nothing to do with the gentleman
of the Fiery Sword, which with only one backhand had split two
fierce and colossal giants. It was better with Bernardo del Carpio,
because in Roncesvalles the enchanted Roldán had died, using the
Hercules industry, when he drowned Anteus, the son of Earth, between
arms. He said much good about the giant Morgante, because, being of
that gigantic generation, who are all arrogant and inordinate, he
he was just good natured and well bred. But, above all, it was fine with Reinaldos
Montalbán, and more when I saw him leave his castle and steal
ran into, and when abroad he stole that idol of Muhammad that was all made of gold,
according to his story. Give him, for kicking the traitor of
Galalon, the mistress he had, and even his niece in addition.
In fact, finished and his judgment, came to give in the strangest thought
that never gave crazy in the world; and it was that it seemed convenient and
necessary, both for the increase of his honor and for the service of his
republic, become knight errant, and go all over the world with his
weapons and horse to seek adventures and to exercise in everything that
he had read that knights errant exercised, undoing all
genre of offense, and putting himself in occasions and dangers where, ending them,
claim eternal name and fame. Imagine the poor man already crowned with courage
of his arm, at least, of the empire of Trabzon; and so, with these so
pleasant thoughts, carried away by the strange taste he felt in them,
He hastened to put into effect what he wanted.
And the first thing he did was clean some weapons that had been his
great-grandparents, who, taken from rust and full of mold, had
they were put and forgotten in a corner. Clean and season them the best
he could, but he saw that they had a great fault, and it was that they had no trap of
lace, but simple morion; but this was supplied by his industry, because
cartons made a half-hatch mode, which, fitted with the morion, made
a whole hatch look. It is true that to test if it was strong and
could be at risk of a stab, he drew his sword and gave him two
blows, and with the first and at one point he undid what he had done in a
week; and the ease with which he had done it did not cease to be bad for him
pieces, and, to ensure this danger, he did it again,
putting some iron bars inside him, in such a way that he was left
satisfied with his strength; and, without wanting to make a new experience of it, the
He deputized and considered a very fine lace trap.
Then he went to see his nag, and, although it had more rooms than a real one and more
points out that Gonela's horse, which tantum pellis et ossa fuit, seemed to him
that neither Alejandro's Bucephalus nor El Cid's Babieca were equal with him.
Four days went by in imagining what name he would give it; because, according to
He told himself, it was no reason that such a famous knight's horse, and
so good he himself, he was without a known name; and so, I tried
be accommodated in such a way as to declare who he had been, before he was
knight errant, and what he was then; Well, I was very reasoned
that, changing his lord estate, he also changed his name, and charged him
famous and uproarious, as befitted the new order and the new exercise
that he already professed. And so after many names that he formed, erased and
He removed, added, undid, and did again in his memory and imagination, at last
Rocinante came to call him: name, in his opinion, loud, sonorous and
significant than it had been when it was nag, before it is now
It was, it was before and first of all the nags in the world.
Given a name, and so to his liking, to his horse, he wanted to put himself,
and in this thought he lasted another eight days, and at the end he came to be called Don
Quixote; whence -as has been said- the authors of this
true story that, without a doubt, should have been called Quijada, and not Quesada,
as others wanted to say. But, remembering that the brave Amadis did not
he had only been content to call himself Amadis dry, but added the
name of his kingdom and homeland, by famous Hepila, and was called Amadís de Gaula,
thus he wanted, as a good gentleman, to add to his the name of his and
call himself Don Quixote de la Mancha, with which, in his opinion, he declared very
I live her lineage and country, and honored her by taking her nickname.
Clean, then, his weapons, made of the caped morion, named after his
nag and confirming himself, he hinted that he was not lacking another
one thing but looking for a lady to fall in love with; because the knight errant
Without love it was a tree without leaves and without fruit and a body without a soul. He told himself
So:
-If I, because of my bad sins, or because of my good luck, I find myself
there with some giant, as usually happens to knights
walking, and knock him down from an encounter, or split him in the middle of the body, or,
finally, I beat him and I surrender, won't it be good to have someone to send
presented and let him come in and kneel before my sweet lady, and say
with a humble and surrendered voice: `` I, lady, am the giant Caraculiambro,
lord of the Malindrania island, who was defeated in a singular battle by
never as should be praised knight Don Quixote de la Mancha, who
ordered me to appear before your mercy, so that your greatness
dispose of me at will ''?
Oh, how our good gentleman rejoiced when he had made this speech,
and more when he found someone to name his lady! And it was, to what is believed,
that in a place near hers there was a farm girl of very good
it seems, with whom he was once in love, although, according to what is understood,
she never knew, nor did she give him a taste of it. His name was Aldonza Lorenzo, now
This seemed to him well to give her the title of mistress of her thoughts; and,
looking for a name that did not deviate much from his, and that he would
went to the one of princess and great lady, came to call her Dulcinea of ​​the
Toboso, because he was a native of Toboso; name, in his opinion, musician and
pilgrim and significant, like all the others that him and his things
I had put.
Chapter II. Which is about the first departure that he made from his land
ingenious don Quixote
With these precautions made, he did not want to wait any longer to put in
effected his thought, pressing to it the lack that he thought he was doing
in the world his delay, according to the grievances he intended to undo,
one-eyed to straighten, unreason to amend, and abuses to improve and
debts to satisfy. And so, without informing anyone of his
intention, and without anyone seeing him, one morning, before the day, that he was a
of the hot days of July, he armed himself with all his weapons, climbed over
Rocinante, donning his ill-composed headpiece, embraced his shield, took his
spear, and, through the false door of a corral, went out into the field with great
glad and elated to see how easily he had started his
good wish. But he hardly saw himself in the field, when a thought struck him
terrible, and such, that it almost made him leave the company he had started; and went
that came to his memory that he was not a knighthood, and that, according to law
of cavalry, neither could nor should take arms with any knight; and,
since he was, he had to bear edged weapons, as a new knight,
without company in the shield, until by his effort he won it. These
Thoughts made him waver in his purpose; more, being able more his
madness for any other reason, he proposed to make himself a knight of the
first encountered, in imitation of many others who did so, according to
he had read in the books how they had him. Regarding the bladed weapons,
thought to clean them in a way, instead of taking place, that they were more than a
ermine; and with this he quieted down and continued on his way, taking no other than
the one that his horse wanted, believing that in that consisted the force of
the Adventures.
As our brand-new adventurer was walking, he was talking to himself
same and saying:
- Who doubts but that in the coming times, when the
true story of my famous deeds, that the wise man who wrote them
do not put, when I come to count this my first departure so early in the morning,
This way ?: «There was hardly the ruddy Apollo stretched out across the face of the
wide and spacious land the golden strands of her beautiful hair, and
scarcely the little painted birds with their harped tongues had
greeted with sweet and mellifluous harmony the coming of the rosy dawn, which,
leaving the soft bed of the jealous husband, by the doors and balconies of the
Manchego horizon to mortals was shown, when the famous knight
Don Quixote de la Mancha, leaving his idle feathers, climbed on his famous
Rocinante horse, and began to walk through the old and well-known field of
Montiel ».
And it was the truth that he walked by. And he added saying:
-Happy age, and a blessed century that where the famous
feats of mine, worth carving in bronzes, sculpting in marbles and
be painted on boards for memory in the future. O you lovely sage,
Whoever you are, who must be the crown minister of this pilgrim
history, I beg you not to forget my good Rocinante, eternal companion
mine in all my ways and careers!
Then he would come back saying, as if he were truly in love:
-O princess Dulcinea, lady of this captive heart!
you have fired me and reproached me with the rigorous settlement of
send me not to appear before your beauty. Fold yourselves, lady, of
membranes of your subject heart, that you care so much for your love
suffers.
With these he was stringing other nonsense, all in the manner of which his
books had taught him, imitating their language as much as possible. With this,
He walked so slowly, and the sun came in so quickly and with such fervor, that
It would be enough to melt your brains, if any.
Almost all that day he walked without happening to him anything to tell, of what
who was desperate, because he wanted to run into later with whom to do
experience the value of his strong arm. There are authors who say that the
The first adventure that happened to him was that of Puerto Lapice; others say that the
of the windmills; but, what I have been able to find out in this case,
and what I have found written in the Annals of La Mancha, is that he walked
all that day, and in the evening he and his nag were tired and
starving; and that, looking everywhere to see if he would discover
some castle or some sheepfold of shepherds where to gather and where he could
remedy his great hunger and need, he saw, not far from the road where
I was going, a sale, which was as if I saw a star that, not to the portals,
but to the fortresses of his redemption he was on his way. God hurry to walk
and he reached it in time for nightfall.
Perhaps two young women were at the door, of those who called from the party,
who were going to Seville with some muleteers who at the sale that night
they got to do the day; and, as our adventurer all that
thought, saw or imagined it seemed to him to be done and to pass the way of what
he had read, after he saw the sale, he was represented that it was a castle
with its four towers and spiers of shining silver, without missing its
drawbridge and deep cava, with all those adherents who like
castles are painted. It was coming to the sale, which seemed to him
castle, and a short distance from it he held the reins to Rocinante, waiting
that some dwarf should stand between the battlements to signal with some
trumpet of which a knight came to the castle. But, as you saw that I know
They were late and Rocinante was hurrying to get to the stables,
came to the door of the inn, and saw the two distracted girls who were there
they were, who seemed to him two beautiful maidens or two graceful
ladies who were basking in front of the castle gate. In this,
Perhaps it happened that a swineherd who was picking up a
herd of pigs - which, without forgiveness, they are called - blew a horn, whose
sign they are collected, and instantly Don Quixote was represented what
he wished, that it was that some dwarf made a sign of his coming; and so on, with
happy stranger, came to the sale and the ladies, who, as they saw
come a man of that sort, armed and with spear and shield, full of
fear, they were going to enter the sale; but Don Quixote, choosing for his
fled his fear, raising his paper visor and discovering his dry and
dusty face, with a gentle disposition and calm voice, he said to them:
-Don't be your mercies or fear any misgivings; ca to order
of cavalry that I profess does not touch or concern anyone, the more
as tall maidens as your presence shows.
The girls looked at him, and they walked with their eyes searching his face, that the
bad visor concealed him; but, as they heard themselves called maidens, such a
outside of their profession, they could not have laughter, and it was in a way that don
Quixote came to come and tell them:
-The moderation seems good in the beautiful ones, and it is a lot of nonsense besides the laughter
that comes from a slight cause; but I'm not saying it because you go or
you show a bad mood; that mine is not the one to serve you.
The language, not understood of the ladies, and the bad size of our
Knight increased in them the laughter and in him the anger; and it will happen very
go ahead if at that point the innkeeper did not come out, man who, being very
fat man, he was very peaceful, who, seeing that distorted figure, armed
weapons as unequal as were the bridle, spear, shield and corselet, not
he was in no way accompanying the maidens in the displays of their contentment.
But, in effect, fearing the machine with so many supplies, he determined
talk to him in a measured way; and thus, he said:
-If your grace, gentleman, look for an inn, in addition to the bed (because
in this sale there are none), everything else will be found in it in many
abundance.
Seeing Don Quixote the humility of the warden of the fortress, how
It seemed to him the innkeeper and the sale, he replied:
-For me, Mr. Castilian, anything is enough, because
my harness is weapons,
my rest is fighting, etc.
The guest thought that calling him Castilian had been because he had
resemblance of the healthy ones of Castile, although he was Andalusian, and of those of the
Sanlúcar beach, no less a thief than Caco, no less a thief than
student body page; and thus, he replied:
-According to this, the beds of your grace will be hard rocks, and their sleep,
always watch; and being so, it is possible to get off, with the certainty of finding
in this hut occasion and occasions not to sleep in a whole year, the more
in one night.
And, saying this, he went to take the stirrup to Don Quixote, who got down with
much difficulty and work, like the one who had not been
had breakfast.
Then he told the guest to take good care of his horse, because
It was the best bread-eating piece in the world. The innkeeper looked at him, and
It seemed as good as Don Quixote said, not even half; and, accommodating
in the stable, he again saw what his host was sending, to which they were
disarming the maidens, who had already reconciled with him; which,
Although they had removed the breastplate and the back, they never knew or could
disengage the collar, or remove the twisted headpiece, which was tied
with green ribbons, and it was necessary to cut them, because the
lumps; but he did not want to consent to it in any way, and thus, he stayed all
that night with the hat on, which was the funniest and strangest
figure that you could think of; and, by disarming him, as he imagined that
those brought and carried that disarmed him were some of the main
ladies and gentlemen of that castle, he said with much grace:
-I was never a gentleman
ladies so well served
as was don Quixote
when he came from his village:
maidens healed him;
princesses, her rocino,
or Rocinante, this is the name, ladies of mine, of my horse, and gift
Quixote de la Mancha is mine; that, since I would not want to discover myself
that the fazañas dates in your service and they will discover me, the force
to accommodate the present purpose this old Lanzarote romance has been
cause you to know my name before all seasons; but, time will come when
Your lordships order me and I obey, and the courage of my arm
discover the desire I have to serve you.
The girls, who were not made to listen to such rhetoric, did not respond
word; they only asked him if he wanted to eat anything.
`` I would do anything, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because, to what I understand,
I would do a lot to the case.
To say the least, it happened to be Friday that day, and there was not in all the sale but
some portions of a fish that in Castile they call pollock, and in Andalusia
bacallao, and in other parts curadillo, and in other trout. They asked him
if by chance he would eat his mercy trout, that there was no other fish that
give him to eat.
`` As there are many trout, '' answered Don Quixote, `` they can be used as one
trout, because that gives me eight reales in singles than in one
piece of eight. The more, what could it be that these trout were
like veal, which is better than cow, and kid than bastard.
But, whatever it is, come on later, that the work and weight of the weapons does not
It can be carried without the government of the guts.
They set the table at the door of the sale, for the fresco, and brought the
guest a portion of the badly soaked and worse cooked bacallao, and a bread so
black and grimy like their weapons; but it was a matter of great laugh to see him
eat, because, as he had on his hat and raised his visor, he could not
put anything in the mouth with their hands if someone else did not give it to them and put it on; and there,
one of those ladies served as needed. But, when giving him to drink, no
it was possible, nor would it be if the innkeeper did not drill a reed, and put the
out in the mouth, on the other he was pouring the wine; and all this I received
in patience, in exchange for not breaking the ribbons of the trap.
While at this, perhaps a pig castrator came to be sold; and so
as he arrived, he blew his reed whistle four or five times, thereby
Don Quixote had just confirmed that he was in some famous castle, and that
they served him with music, and that the haddock was trout; the bread, candeal; and
the whores, ladies; and the innkeeper, Castilian of the castle, and with this gave
however well used his determination and departure. But what most tired him was
not to see himself knighted, because it seemed to him that he could not put
legitimately in any adventure without receiving the order of chivalry.
Chapter III. Wherein is recounted the funny way that Don Quixote had in
knight
And so, weary from this thought, he shortened his cheap and limited dinner; the
which finished, he called the innkeeper, and, shutting himself up with him in the stable,
knelt before him, saying:
I will never get up from where I am, brave knight,
your courtesy grant me a gift that I want to ask, which will result in
your praise and for the benefit of mankind.
The innkeeper, who saw his guest at his feet and heard such reasons,
He was confused looking at him, not knowing what to do or say to him, and he insisted with
him to get up, and he never wanted to, until he had to tell him that he
He gave the gift I asked for.
-I did not expect less of your great magnificence, my lord
Don Quixote answered; and thus, I tell you that the gift that I have asked of you, and
Your liberality has been granted to me, it is that tomorrow on that day I will
you have to arm a knight, and tonight in the chapel of your
castle I will watch over the weapons; and tomorrow, as I have said, will be fulfilled what
so much desire, to be able, as it should be, to go through all the four parts of the
world looking for adventures, in favor of the needy, as it is in charge
of cavalry and knights-errant, as I am, whose desire to
such feats is inclined.
The innkeeper, who, as has been said, was a bit sly and already had some
suspicions of his host's lack of judgment, he just believed it when
He had just heard such reasons from him, and, because he had to laugh that night,
determined to follow the humor; and thus, he told him that he was very successful in
what he wanted and asked for, and that such a proposition was proper and natural to
gentlemen as leading as he seemed and as his gallant presence
showed; and that he, anxiously, in the years of his youth, had given himself to
that honorable exercise, walking around the world looking for his
adventures, without leaving the Percheles of Malaga, the Riarán Islands,
Compass of Seville, Azoguejo of Segovia, the Olivera of Valencia, Rondilla of
Granada, Sanlúcar Beach, Potro de Córdoba and the Ventillas de Toledo and
various other parts, where he had exercised the lightness of his feet,
subtlety of his hands, making many one-eyed, laying many widows,
undoing some maidens and fooling some wards, and finally
making itself known by how many hearings and courts there are almost in all
Spain; and that, at last, he had come to pick up his castle,
where he lived with his property and with others, gathering in it all the
knights errant, of whatever quality and condition they were, just for
the great fondness he had for them and because they parted with him of their assets, in
payment of your good wish.
He also told him that in that castle there was no chapel where he could
watch over the weapons, because it was knocked down to do it again; but what,
in case of need, he knew that they could be watched anywhere, and that
that night he could watch them in a courtyard of the castle; that in the morning,
God being served, due ceremonies would be performed, so that he
was knighted, and so a knight that he could not be more in the
world.
He asked if he had any money; Don Quixote answered that he was not wearing white,
because he had never read in the knights errant stories that
none would have brought them. To this the innkeeper said that he was deceiving himself; that,
since the stories were not written, because they seemed to
the authors of them that it was not necessary to write something so clear and so
necessary to bring money and clean shirts, not for that reason
he had to believe that they were not hacked; and so, I had by the way and found out
that all the knights errant, that so many books are full and
crowded, their bags were well shod, so that they could
succeed them; and that they also carried shirts and a small chest full of
ointments to heal the wounds they received, because not all times in the
fields and deserts where they fought and wounded there were those who
be healed, if it was no longer that they had some charming sage for a friend, who then
I would help them, bringing through the air, in some cloud, some maiden or dwarf
with some flask of water of such virtue that, in tasting some drop of it,
then to the point they were healthy from their sores and wounds, as if some evil
would have had. But as long as this was not there, they had the
past knights for the right thing to do that their squires were provided with
money and other necessary things, such as lint and ointments for
heal; and, when it happened that such knights had no squires,
which were few and far between, they themselves carried everything in a
very subtle saddlebags, which hardly resembled the horse's haunches,
as it was something else of more importance; because, not being by occasion
Similarly, this carrying saddlebags was not widely accepted among the gentlemen
walking; and for this he gave him advice, since he could still send it to him as
to his godson, how soon he had to be, not to walk from there
forward without money and without the aforementioned preventions, and that I would see how
well he was with them when least expected.
Don Quixote promised to do what he was advised to do with all
puntuality; and thus, the order was then given as to watch the weapons in a corral
big that on one side of the sale was; and, collecting them Don Quixote
all, he put them on a pile that was next to a well, and, embracing his
shield, took hold of his spear and with gentle continent began to walk
in front of the pile; and when the walk began the night began to close.
The innkeeper told all those who were in the sale the madness of his
guest, the candle of arms and the cavalry frame that he was waiting for.
They were amazed at such a strange genre of madness and went to look at it from
far away, and they saw that, with a calm gesture, he sometimes walked; others,
leaning close to his spear, he cast his eyes on the weapons, without taking them away for a good
dellas space. The night ended, but with such clarity of the
moon, who could compete with the one who lent it, so that how much the
Novice gentleman did was well regarded by all. In this it seemed to one of
the muleteers who were in the sale go to give water to their pack, and it was
it is necessary to remove Don Quixote's weapons, which were on the pile; the
which, seeing him arrive, in a loud voice said to him:
-Oh you, whoever you are, daring gentleman, who gets to touch the
weapons of the bravest errant who ever girded a sword !, look what you do
and do not touch them, if you do not want to give up life in payment of your daring.
The muleteer was not cured for these reasons (and it would be better if he cured himself, because
out to be cured in health); before, locking the straps, he threw them big
stretch of itself. Which, seen by Don Quixote, raised his eyes to heaven, and,
Putting his thought - to what seemed - to his mistress Dulcinea, he said:
-Accommodate me, my lady, in this first affront that to this yours
overwhelmed chest is offered to him; do not faint in this first trance
your favor and protection.
And, saying these and other similar reasons, letting go of the shield, he raised his
lance with two hands and gave with it such a great blow to the muleteer on the head,
that knocked him to the ground, so battered that, if he were to second with another,
he needed a teacher to heal him. This done, he collected his weapons and
he returned to pacing with the same repose as before. From there a little, without
know what had happened (because the muleteer was still stunned), he arrived
another with the same intention of giving water to his mules; and, coming to remove
arms to unload the pile, without Don Quixote speaking a word and without
Asking no one for favor, he dropped his shield again and raised his spear again, and,
without breaking it to pieces, he made more than three the head of the second muleteer, because
opened it for four. All the people from the sale came to the noise, and among
they the innkeeper. Seeing this Don Quixote, he embraced his shield, and, putting
hand to his sword, he said:
-Oh lady of the beauty, effort and vigor of the weakened heart of mine!
Now is the time that you turn the eyes of your greatness to this your captive
Gentleman, what an adventure you are attending.
With this he received, in his opinion, so much encouragement that if all the
muleteers of the world, do not turn your foot back. The companions of the
wounded, who saw them, began to rain stones from afar
about Don Quixote, who, as best he could, repaired himself with his shield,
and he did not dare to leave the pile because he did not abandon his weapons. The innkeeper
shouted to be left, because he had already told them how crazy he was, and that
he would get away with being mad, even if he killed them all. Don Quixote also
gave, seniors, calling them treacherous and traitors, and that the lord of the
castle was a mess and ill-born knight, because in such a way he consented
that the errant knights were treated; And what if he had received the
order of chivalry, that he gave her to understand his treachery:
-But of you, low and low bastard, I don't pay any attention: shoot, get there,
come and offend me as much as you can, that you will see the payment that
you carry your nonsense and too much.
He said this with such vigor and boldness that it struck fear into the
that they attacked him; and, both for this and for the innkeeper's persuasions,
They stopped shooting, and he allowed the wounded to be withdrawn and returned to the candle of his
arms with the same stillness and calm as first.
The landlord did not like the mockery of his guest, and determined
abbreviate and give him the black order of chivalry later, before another
misfortune happened. And so, reaching out to him, he apologized for the insolence
that those low people with him had used, without him knowing anything;
but how well they were punished for their daring. I told him how I already
He had said that there was no chapel in that castle, and for what remained
to do was not necessary either; that all the touch of being armed
knight consisted of the fish and the accolade, according to him he had
news of the ceremonial of the order, and that that in the middle of a field
could do, and that he had already done what he had to do by watching over the
arms, that with only two hours of candlelight it was fulfilled, the more, that he had
been more than four. Don Quixote believed it all, and said that he was
there soon to obey him, and to conclude as soon as possible that
could; because if he were attacked again and he saw himself knighted, no
thought to leave a person alive in the castle, I choose those that he
send himself, whom for his respect he would leave.
Warned and fearful about the Castilian, I later produced a book where
He settled the straw and barley that he gave to the muleteers, and with a candle
who brought him a boy, and with the two already said maids, he came to where
Don Quixote was there, whom he ordered to kneel; and, reading on your
manual, as if saying some devout prayer, in the middle of the legend he raised
his hand and gave him a good blow on the neck, and behind him, with his same
sword, a gentle accolade, always muttering under his breath, as if
prayed. This done, he ordered one of those ladies to gird him the sword,
which she did with great ease and discretion, because it was not necessary
little to not burst with laughter at each point of the ceremonies; but the
feats they had already seen of the new knight had their laughter at bay.
As the sword was girded around him, the good lady said:
-God make at your mercy a very fortunate knight and give him good fortune in
you fight.
Don Quixote asked him what his name was, so that he would know from then on
to whom was bound by the mercy received; because I was thinking of giving
some part of the honor that was achieved by the value of his arm. She
responded with great humility that her name was Tolosa, and that she was the daughter of a
a natural cobbler from Toledo who lived close to Sancho Bienaya, and
that wherever she was she would serve him and have him as her lord. Don
Quixote replied that, for his love, he would do him mercy that from then on
be don and be called Dona Tolosa. She promised, and the other
put on the spur, with which he spent almost the same conversation as with that of
the sword: he asked her name, and she said her name was La Molinera, and that
She was the daughter of an honest miller from Antequera; to which he also begged gift
Quixote to put on a gift and be called Dona Molinera, offering him new
services and mercedes.
Made, then, at a gallop and hurry, the ceremonies never seen before, no
Don Quixote saw the time to see himself on horseback and go out looking for adventure;
and, then saddling Rocinante, he climbed into it, and, embracing his host, he
he said such strange things, thanking him for having armed him
gentleman, it is not possible to correctly refer to them. The innkeeper, to see you already
off the sale, with no less rhetoric, though with shorter words,
answered his, and, without asking for the cost of the inn, let him go to
the good hour.
Chapter IV. Of what happened to our knight when he left the
sale
Dawn would be when Don Quixote left the sale, so happy, so
gallant, so overjoyed to see himself already knighted, that joy
it was bursting by the horse's girths. But, recalling the
advice from your guest about the much-needed preventions you had
to carry with him, especially that of money and shirts, determined to return to
his house and accommodate everything, and a squire, making an account of receiving
to a neighbor farmer of his, who was poor and with children, but very on purpose
for the office of the cavalry squad. With this thought he guided
Rocinante to his village, which, almost knowing the love, with so much
Win began to walk, it seemed that he did not put his feet on the ground.
He had not gone far, when it seemed to him that at his right hand, from the
In the thicket of a forest that was there, delicate voices came out, as if from
person who complained; and he had scarcely heard them, when he said:
-Thank you to heaven for the mercy you do me, because it makes me so quick
occasions ahead where I can fulfill what I owe to my profession, and
where I can take the fruit of my good wishes. These voices are undoubtedly
of some needy or needy, who has needed my favor and help.
And, turning the reins, he directed Rocinante to where it seemed that
voices came out. And a few steps after he entered the forest, he saw a tied
mare to an oak, and tied to another a boy, half-naked
up, up to the age of fifteen, who was the one who gave the voices; and no
without cause, because he was giving him a lot of lashes with a waistband a farmer
of good build, and each lash accompanied him with a rebuke and advice.
Because it said:
-The tongue is left and the eyes ready.
And the boy replied:
"I will not do it again, my lord; for the passion of God, that I will not do another
time; and I promise to be more careful with the herd from now on.
And, seeing what was happening, Don Quixote said with an angry voice:
-Uncourteous gentleman, it seems difficult to take you with whom you cannot defend;
get on your horse and take your spear - which also had a
spear close to the top where the mare was rented-, that I
I will make known what you are doing to be cowards.
The farmer, who saw above him that figure full of weapons brandishing the
spear on his face, he thought he was dead, and with good words he replied:
Sir knight, this boy I am punishing is a my servant, who
It helps me to keep a herd of sheep that I have in these contours, the
Which is so careless, that every day I lack one; and, because I punish her
carelessness, or beauty, says that I do it miserable, for not paying the
soldier that I owe him, and in God and in my soul that lies.
-Do you "lie" in front of me, you vile villain? said Don Quixote. By the sun that
It enlightens us, that I am about to pass you from part to part with this spear. Pay him
then without further reply; if not, by the God who governs us, may he conclude you and
annihilate at this point. Untie it later.
The farmer lowered his head and, without answering a word, untied his servant,
which Don Quixote asked how much his master owed him. He said nine
months, at seven reais each month. Don Quixote made the count and found that
They rode seventy-three reales, and he told the farmer that at the moment the
shell out, if you didn't want to die for it. The fearful villain replied that
for the step he was in and the oath he had taken - and there was still no
sworn nothing-, that they were not so many, because they had to be discounted and
take into account three pairs of shoes that I had given him and a real of two
bloodletting that had been done to him while he was ill.
`` All that is fine, '' replied Don Quixote, `` but keep your shoes and
bleeding for the whipping you have given him without guilt; what if he broke the
leather of the shoes that you paid, you have broken his
body; And if the barber drew blood while he was sick, you in health
you have taken it out; I hope that, for this part, he owes you nothing.
-The damage is, sir, that I have no money here: come
Andrés with me to my house, that I will pay them one real over another.
-Will I go with him? said the boy. But, bad year! No sir, not for
I think; because, seeing himself alone, he skinned me like a Saint Bartholomew.
`` You will not do that, '' replied Don Quixote, `` it is enough that I send it to you for me to
have respect; and with him swearing it to me by the law of chivalry that has
received, I'll let you go free and secure pay.
`` Look at your mercy, sir, what it says, '' said the boy, `` that this my
master is not a knight nor has he received any chivalric order; what is Juan
Haldudo the rich, the Quintanar's neighbor.
`` That matters little, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that Haldudos may have
gentlemen; how much more, that each one is the son of his works.
"That is true," said Andrés; but this my master, of what works is he the son, then
denies me my soldier and my sweat and work?
"I do not deny, brother Andrés," replied the farmer; and make me pleasure
come with me, that I swear by all the orders of chivalry there are
in the world of paying you, as I have said, one real over another, and even
smoked.
"I am amused by the incense," said Don Quixote; give them in reais, what
I'm happy with that; and see that you fulfill it as you have sworn; but,
by the same oath I swear to return to look for you and to punish you, and that
I have to find you, although you hide more than a lizard. And if you want
know who sends you this, to be more truly obliged to comply,
know that I am the brave Don Quixote de la Mancha, the debunker of
grievances and wrongdoing; and God remain, and do not leave your minds what
promised and sworn, under penalty of the sentence pronounced.
And, in saying this, he stung his Rocinante, and in a short space he moved away
of them. The farmer followed him with his eyes, and when he saw that there was
passed out of the forest and no longer seemed, he turned to his servant Andrés and
said to him:
-Come here, my son, I want to pay you what I owe you, like that
undoer of grievances left me sent.
"I swear so," said Andrés; and how will your grace be successful in
fulfill the commandment of that good knight, may he live a thousand years; that,
as he is brave and a good judge, lives Roque, that if he doesn't pay me, that
come back and execute what you said!
"I swear it too," said the farmer; but, because of how much I love you,
I want to increase the debt by increasing the pay.
And, seizing his arm, he tied him back to the oak, where he gave him so many
whipping, which left him for dead.
`` Call, Señor Andrés, now, '' said the farmer, `` to the debunker of grievances,
You will see how this one does not deface; although I think it is not finished doing,
because I feel like skinning you alive, as you feared.
But, in the end, he untied him and gave him permission to go find his judge, to
to execute the pronounced sentence. Andrés broke something sullen,
swearing to go find the brave Don Quixote de la Mancha and detail
point by point what had happened, and that he had to pay for it with the
setenas. But, with all this, he left crying and his master stayed
laughing.
And in this way the brave Don Quixote undid the offense; which,
very happy with what happened, seeming to him that he had given very happy and high
beginning to his cavalry, with great satisfaction of himself he walked
towards his village, saying in a low voice:
-Well, you can call yourself happy about how many live on earth today, oh
about the beautiful Dulcinea del Toboso !, because you were lucky enough to have
subject and surrendered to all your will and disposition to a so brave and so
knighted as he is and will be Don Quixote de la Mancha, who,
As everyone knows, yesterday he received the order of chivalry, and today he
the greatest one-eyed person and offense that formed the unreason and committed the
cruelty: today he took the whip from the hand of that ruthless enemy who so
without occasion he beat up that delicate infant.
In this, he came to a road that divided into four, and then he came to
imagination the crossroads where knights errant stood at
think which way of those they would take, and, to imitate them, he spent a while
I stay; and, after having thought about it very well, he released Rocinante,
leaving to the will of the nag his, which followed his first attempt,
which was to leave on the way to his stable.
And, having walked about two miles, Don Quixote discovered a large crowd
of people, who, as it later became known, were some merchants from Toledo who
they were going to buy silk in Murcia. There were six of them, and they came with their parasols, with
four other servants on horseback and three mule-boys on foot. Just the
he spotted Don Quixote, when he imagined himself to be something of a new adventure; and by
to imitate as much as he thought possible the steps he had read in
his books, it seemed to him to come from a mold one that he was thinking of making. And so,
with gentle restraint and boldness, he steadied himself in his stirrups, tightened his
spear, the shield came to the chest, and, placed in the middle of the path, was
waiting for those knights errant to arrive, that he already for such
He had them and judged them; and, when they reached a distance that could be seen and heard,
Don Quixote raised his voice, and with an arrogant gesture said:
-Everyone has it, if everyone does not confess that there is no
world all maiden more beautiful than the Empress of La Mancha, the unparalleled
Dulcinea del Toboso.
The merchants stopped for these reasons, and to see the strange figure
of the one who said them; and, for the figure and for the reasons, then they saw
the madness of its owner; but they wanted to see slowly what that stopped
confession that was asked of them, and one of them, who was a little mocking and very
very discreet, he said:
-Mr. Gentleman, we do not know who is that good lady who
you say; show her to us: that if she were as beautiful as you mean,
willingly and without any pressure we will confess the truth that on the part
yours is asked of us.
`` If I showed it to you, '' replied Don Quixote, `` what would you do in
confess such a glaring truth? The importance is that without seeing it
you have to believe, confess, affirm, swear and defend; where not, with me
you are in battle, enormous and proud people. That, now you come one by one,
as requested by the order of chivalry, pray all together, as is custom and
bad use of those of your kind, here I await you and wait, trusting in
the reason that on my part I have.
`` Sir knight, '' replied the merchant, `` I beg at your mercy, in the name of
of all these princes that we are here, why not order
our consciences confessing a thing for us never seen or heard,
and more being so to the detriment of the empresses and queens of Alcarria and
Estremadura, may your grace be served to show us some portrait of
that lady, even if she is the size of a grain of wheat; that by the thread
will remove the ball, and we will be satisfied and safe with this, and your
mercy will be happy and paid; and I still think that we are already so on your side
that, although her portrait shows us that she is one-eyed and that of the other
vermilion and sulfur stone flow, with all that, to please your
Grace, we will say in your favor everything you want.
"It doesn't flow, you infamous scoundrel," answered Don Quixote, fired with anger;
it does not flow from him, I mean, what you say, but amber and civet among cottons; and no
it is one-eyed or crooked, but more upright than a Guadarrama spindle. But
you will pay the great blasphemy that you have spoken against such a beauty
as is my lady's.
And, in saying this, he lashed out with his low spear against the one who had
said, with such fury and anger that, if good luck did not make
Halfway through the road he will stumble and fall Rocinante, the daring one will have a bad time
merchant. Rocinante fell, and his master rolled a good piece through the
countryside; and, wanting to get up, she could never: such a pregnancy caused her
spear, shield, spurs and headpiece, with the weight of ancient weapons. AND,
meanwhile he was struggling to get up and could not, he was saying:
-Don't go, cowardly people; captive people, take heed !; not because of me,
but from my horse, I am lying here.
A mule handler of those who came there, who must not be very good
intentionally, hearing the poor fallen man say so many arrogances, he could not
suffer without giving the answer in the ribs. And, reaching out to him, he took the
spear, and, after having smashed it, with one of them began to give
our Don Quixote so many sticks that, despite and despite his weapons,
ground like cyber. His masters were shouting at him not to give him so much and to
left, but the waiter was already chopped and did not want to leave the game until
envy all the rest of your anger; and, going for the other pieces of the
spear, he finished undoing them on the miserable fallen, who, with all
that tempest of sticks that he traveled over, he did not close his mouth, threatening
to heaven and earth, and to the miscreants, how they seemed to him.
The waiter grew tired, and the merchants went on their way, carrying what to tell
in all of him of the poor beaten. Who, after finding himself alone, returned to
test if he could get up; but if he couldn't do it when healthy and good,
How would I make it ground up and almost undone? And he still considered himself happy,
it seemed to him that this was the misfortune of knights-errant, and
He attributed it all to the lack of his horse, and it was not possible to get up,
as his whole body was hazy.
Chapter V. Where the narrative of the misfortune of our
gentleman
Seeing, then, that, in effect, he could not wag, he agreed to take advantage of his
ordinary remedy, which was to think of some passage in his books; and bring your
madness to the memory that of Valdovinos and the Marquis of Mantua, when
Carloto left him wounded in the mountains, a story known to children, not
ignored by the young men, celebrated and even believed by the old men; and, with everything
this, no truer than the miracles of Muhammad. This, then, seemed to him
he who came from a mold for the step in which he was; and so on, with
samples of great feeling, began to overturn on the ground and say
with weakened breath the same thing they say said the wounded knight of the
Forest:
-Where are you, my lady,
that my bad does not hurt you?
Or don't you know, ma'am,
or you are false and unfair.
And, in this way, the romance continued to those verses that
they say:
-O noble Marquis of Mantua,
my uncle and carnal lord!
And as luck would have it, when he came to this verse, he happened to pass through there
a farmer from his own place and his neighbor, who came from carrying a load
from wheat to the mill; who, seeing that man lying there, came to
him and asked him who he was and how bad he felt that he so sadly
complained. Don Quixote believed, without a doubt, that this was the Marquis of Mantua,
your uncle; and thus, he did not answer anything else if it was not to continue in his romance,
where he gave an account of his misfortune and the loves of the Emperor's son
with his wife, all in the same way that romance sings it.
The farmer was amazed hearing such nonsense; and, removing the
visor, which was already torn to pieces from the sticks, wiped his face, which
it had him covered in dust; and had barely cleaned him, when he met him and
Told him:
-Mr. Quijana -that's what he should have been called when he had judgment and
had gone from calm nobleman to errant knight- who has put
your grace this luck?
But he continued with their romance when I asked him. Seeing this the good
man, the best he could he took off his bib and back, to see if he had
any injury; but he saw no blood or any sign. He tried to lift him from
the ground, and with no little work he climbed on his donkey, for seeming
calmer cavalry. He picked up the weapons, even the splinters of the spear,
and liólas on Rocinante, whom he took by the rein, and from the halter to the
donkey, and walked towards his village, very thoughtful of hearing the nonsense
what Don Quixote used to say; and no less was Don Quixote, who, out of pure grind and
broken, you could not have on the donkey, and from time to time gave
a few sighs that put them in heaven; so again he forced that
the farmer asked him to tell him how bad he felt; and it only seems that the
The devil reminded him of the stories adapted to his events, because,
At that point, forgetting Valdovinos, he remembered the Moor Abindarráez,
when the warden of Antequera, Rodrigo de Narváez, seized him and took him
captive to his warden. So that when the farmer returned to
ask how he was and what he felt, he answered the same words and
reasons that the captive Abencerraje responded to Rodrigo de Narváez, of the
In the same way that he had read the story in La Diana, by Jorge de
Montemayor, where it is written; taking advantage of it so on purpose, that he
farmer was giving himself to the devil to hear so much machine of nonsense; by
where he learned that his neighbor was crazy, and hurried him to get to the
town, to excuse the anger that Don Quixote caused him with his long
harangue. After which he said:
-Know your grace, Mr. Don Rodrigo de Narváez, that this beautiful Jarifa
that I have said is now the pretty Dulcinea del Toboso, for whom I have done,
I do and will do the most famous acts of chivalry that have been seen, see or
they will see in the world.
To this the farmer replied:
-Look at your mercy, sir, my sinner, that I am not Don Rodrigo de
Narváez, nor the Marquis of Mantua, but Pedro Alonso, his neighbor; nor yours
mercy is Valdovinos, nor Abindarráez, but the honored nobleman of the Lord
Quijana.
"I know who I am," answered Don Quixote. and I know that I can be not only the
that I have said, but all the Twelve Peers of France, and even all the Nine
of Fame, because to all the feats that they all together and each for
yes they did, mine will be the best.
In these talks and others like them, they arrived at the place at the time
It was getting dark, but the farmer waited for it to be a little more night, because
See the grinding gentleman as a bad gentleman. So the time for him has arrived.
seemed, entered the town, and into Don Quixote's house, which he found
all in an uproar; and the priest and the barber of the place were in it, who were
great friends of Don Quixote, who was calling out to them his mistress:
-What do you think of your grace, Mr. Pero Pérez -that's how
called the priest-, of the misfortune of my lord? Three days ago that do not seem
he, nor the nag, nor the shield, nor the spear nor the weapons. Hapless of
me !, I give myself to understand, and this is the truth as I was born to die,
that these damn books of chivalry that he has and usually reads so
ordinary they have returned his judgment; that now I remember having heard him say
many times, talking to each other, that he wanted to become a knight-errant and
go looking for adventures in those worlds. Entrusted to Satan and
Barabbas such books, which have thus spoiled the most delicate
understanding that was in all the Channel.
The niece said the same, and said even more:
-Know, Mr. Master Nicolás -that this was the name of the barber-, that many
times it happened to my lord uncle to be reading in these heartless
books of misadventures two days and nights, after which,
He threw the book from his hands, and put his hand to the sword and walked
stabs with the walls; and when he was very tired, he said there was
killed four giants like four towers, and the sweat that sweated from the
tiredness said that it was blood of the feridas that had received in the
battle; and then drank a large jug of cold water, and he was healthy and
calmly, saying that that water was a very precious drink that
the wise Esquife, a great charmer and friend of his, had brought with him. More me
I am to blame for everything, that I did not warn your mercedes of the nonsense
of my lord uncle, to remedy it before reaching what has
arrived, and they will burn all these unhealthy books, which has many, which
they well deserve to be burned, as if they were heretics.
`` This is what I say too, '' said the priest,
tomorrow without them not being a public act and they are condemned to fire,
because they do not give opportunity to whoever reads them to do what my good friend should
having done.
All this the farmer and Don Quixote were hearing, with which he finished
understand the farmer the disease of his neighbor; and so he began to say to
voices:
-Open your favors to Mr. Valdovinos and the Marquis of Mantua,
that comes ill-taken, and the Moorish lord Abindarráez, who brings captive the
courageous Rodrigo de Narváez, warden of Antequera.
To these voices they all came out, and, as some knew their friend, the
others to his master and uncle, who had not yet dismounted from the donkey, because
could, they ran to hug him. He said:
-All of you have, that I have been hurt by the fault of my horse. Take me to
my bed and call, if possible, the wise Urganda, who heals and catches
of my holidays.
-Look, at a mace hour -the mistress said at this point-, if I said well my
heart of the foot that limped my lord! Raise your mercy in good time,
that, without that Hurgada coming, we will know how to cure him here. Damn, I say
be again and other hundred these books of chivalry, how have they
standing at your mercy!
They then took him to bed, and, catching the holidays, they did not find him
none; and he said it was all grinding, for having taken a great fall
with Rocinante, his horse, fighting with ten jayans, the most
wild and daring that could fail in much of the earth.
-Ta, ta! said the priest. Are Jayanes in the dance? For my holy one, what
I'll burn them tomorrow before night comes.
They asked Don Quixote a thousand questions, and he did not want to answer another
thing but that they gave him food and let him sleep, which was what
it mattered. This was done, and in the long run the priest informed himself of the farmer of the
So he had found Don Quixote. He told her everything, with the
nonsense that when he found him and when he brought him he had said; what was to put more
desire in the graduate to do what he did another day, which was to call his
friend the barber Master Nicolás, with whom he came to Don Quixote's house,
Chapter VI. Of the gracious and great scrutiny that the priest and the barber
made in the bookstore of our ingenious hidalgo
who was still sleeping. He asked the niece for the keys to the room
where were the books, authors of the damage, and she gave them very good
win. They all went inside, and he loves her with them, and they found more than a hundred
bodies of large books, very well bound, and other small ones; and so
As the mistress saw them, she left the room again with great haste, and returned
then with a bowl of holy water and a hyssop, and said:
-Take your mercy, mister lawyer: spray this room, don't be here
some charmer of the many who have these books, and we love them, in
sorrow we want to give them by kicking them out of the world.
The simplicity of the mistress caused the licentiate to laugh, and he commanded the barber to
was giving of those books one by one, to see what they were about, well
it could be to find some that did not deserve punishment of fire.
`` No, '' said the niece, `` there is no reason to forgive any of them, because they have all
been the harmers; it would be better to throw them out the windows into the courtyard, and
make a pile of them and set them on fire; and if not, take them to the corral, and
there the bonfire will be made, and the smoke will not offend.
The mistress said the same: such was the desire that the two had of the death of
those innocent; but the priest did not come into it without first even reading
The titles. And the first one that Master Nicolás gave him in the hands was Los
four of Amadís de Gaula, and the priest said:
-This seems like something of a mystery; because, as I have heard, this book was
the first of caballerias to be printed in Spain, and all the others have
taken from the beginning and origin of this; and thus, it seems to me that, as a dogmatizer
of such a bad sect, we owe it, without excuse, to condemn the fire.
`` No, sir, '' said the barber, `` I have also heard that he is the best of
all the books of this genre that have been composed; and so, as a unique
in his art, he must be forgiven.
`` This is true, '' said the priest, `` and for that reason he is given life for
now. Let's see who is next to him.
`` It is, '' said the barber, `` the Sergas de Esplandián, legitimate son of Amadís de
Gaula.
`` Well, really, '' said the priest, `` the goodness of
dad. Take, lady mistress: open that window and throw him into the corral, and give
top to the pile of the bonfire to be made.
The mistress did so with great happiness, and good old Esplandián flew away
to the corral, waiting patiently for the fire that threatened him.
"Come in," said the priest.
"This one who is coming," said the barber, "is Amadis from Greece; and even all
from this side, to what I believe, they are of the same lineage of Amadís.
"Then everyone go to the corral," said the priest; that, in exchange for burning the
Queen Pintiquiniestra, and Pastor Darinel, and his eclogues, and
devilish and revolted reasons of its author, I will burn with them the father who
he begot me, if I walked in the figure of a knight errant.
"That seems to me," said the barber.
"And even me," added the niece.
"Well, that's how it is," said the mistress, "come and go to the corral with them."
They gave them, there were many, and she saved the ladder and found them by
the window down.
-Who is that barrel? -said the priest.
"This is," replied the barber, "Don Olivante de Laura."
`` The author of that book, '' said the priest, `` was the same who composed Jardín de
flowers; and in truth that I do not know how to determine which of the two books is more
true, or, to put it better, less of a liar; I only know how to say that this one will go
to the corral for crazy and arrogant.
"This next one is Florimorte de Hircania," said the barber.
"Is there Senor Florimorte?" replied the priest. Well, by faith
to stop quickly in the corral, despite his strange birth and sounded
adventure; that the hardness and dryness of his style does not give way to anything else.
To the corral with him and with him, mistress.
"May it please me, my lord," she answered; and with great joy he executed what
that was commanded to him.
"This is The Knight Platir," said the barber.
"This is an old book," said the priest, "and I find nothing in it that deserves
came. Accompany the others without reply.
And so it was done. Another book was opened and they saw that it was titled El
Knight of the Cross.
-By name as holy as this book has, you could forgive its
ignorance; but it is also often said: "behind the cross is the devil"; Wow
to the fire.
Taking the barber another book, he said:
-This is Mirror of Chivalry.
"I already know his mercy," said the priest. There is Mr. Reinaldos from
Montalbán with his friends and companions, more thieves than Caco, and the twelve
Pairs, with the true historian Turpín; and in truth that I am by
condemn them no more than perpetual banishment, even because they have part
of the invention of the famous Mateo Boyardo, from which he also wove his cloth
Christian poet Ludovico Ariosto; to whom, if I find him here, and who speaks in
other language than his, I will not respect him any; but if you speak in your
language, I'll put it on my head.
"Well, I have him in Italian," said the barber, "but I don't understand him."
-It would not even be good for you to understand him -the priest replied-, and here he
let us forgive the captain for not having brought him to Spain and
Castilian; which took away much of its natural value, and they will all do the same
those who the books of verse would like to return in another language: that, for
much care that they put and skill that they show, they will never get to the point
that they have in their first birth. I say, in effect, that this book, and
everyone who is found dealing with these things in France, lie down and
deposited in a dry well, until more agreement is seen what has to be
do them, including a Bernardo del Carpio who is out there and another
called Roncesvalles; that these, in reaching my hands, must be in
those of the mistress, and dellas in those of the fire, without any remission.
Everything was confirmed by the barber, and he considered it good and very successful,
for understanding that the priest was such a good Christian and such a friend of the truth,
that I would not say otherwise for all of the world. And, opening another book, he saw
who was Palmerín de Oliva, and next to him was another named Palmerín
of England; which, seen by the lawyer, said:
-That olive is then sliced ​​and burned, so that there are still no
ashes; and that palm of England is kept and preserved as a thing
unique, and make for it another box like the one Alexander found in the
Dario's remains, who deputed it to keep in it the works of the poet
Homer. This book, mister compadre, has authority for two things: the one,
because he himself is very good, and the other, because it is fame that he composed a
discreet king of Portugal. All the adventures of the Miraguarda castle
They are beautiful and of great artifice; the reasons, courteous and clear, that
keep and look at the decorum of which he speaks with great propriety and
understanding. I say, then, except for your good opinion, Señor Master Nicolás,
that he and Amadís de Gaula are free from the fire, and all the others, without
make more cove and tasting, perish.
"No, senor compadre," replied the barber; that this one that I have here is the
famous Don Belianís.
`` Well, that one, '' replied the priest, `` with the second, third and fourth part, they have
need a little rhubarb to purge his too much anger, and it is
need to take away everything from the Castle of Fame and other
more important impertinences, for which they are terminated
ultramarine, and as they are amended, so it will be used with them of mercy or
of Justice; and meanwhile, have them, compadre, in your house, but not
let none of them read.
"May it please me," replied the barber.
And, not wanting to tire himself more in reading chivalric books, he ordered the mistress to
take all the big ones and find them in the corral. It was not said foolishly
nor to deaf people, but to those who had more desire to burn them than to throw a cloth,
no matter how big and thin it was; and, grabbing almost eight at a time, threw them
Through the window. For taking many together, one fell at the feet of the
barber, who wanted to see whose it was, and saw that it said: History
of the famous knight Tirante el Blanco.
-God help me! said the priest, giving a great voice. That here is Tirante
the target! Give it to me here, compadre; I do realize that I have found in him a
treasure of contentment and a mine of hobbies. Here is Don Quirieleisón from
Montalbán, brave knight, and his brother Tomás de Montalbán, and the
knight Fonseca, with the battle that the brave man of Tirante made with the
Alano, and the wit of the Maiden Pleasure of Life, with the loves and
lies of the Reposada widow, and the Empress, in love with
Hipólito, his squire. Tell us the truth, mister compadre, that, for your style,
This is the best book in the world: here gentlemen eat, and sleep, and
die in their beds, and make a will before their death, with these things
that all other books of this genre lack. With all that, I tell you
that the one who composed him deserved, since he did not do so many industrial foolish things,
to be cast out on galleys for all the days of his life. Take him home and
read it, and you will see that what I have told you is true.
"It will be so," replied the barber; but what will we do with these little books
what are left?
"These," said the priest, "must not be chivalric, but poetry."
And opening one, he saw that it was La Diana, by Jorge de Montemayor, and he said,
believing that all the others were of the same gender:
-These do not deserve to be burned, like the others, because they neither do nor will
damage that the knights have done; which are books of understanding, without
prejudice of third party.
-Oh Lord! said the niece, "your grace may well have them burned,
like the others, because it would not be much that, having healed my lord uncle
of chivalric disease, reading these, he fancied
shepherd and walk through the woods and meadows singing and tolling; and, what
it would be worse, to become a poet; which, they say, is an incurable disease and
catchy.
`` This maiden says it is true, '' said the priest, `` and it will be good to take away our
friend this stumble and opportunity ahead. And, well, we start with La Diana de
Montemayor, I think that it does not burn, but that everything is taken away
what is about the wise Felicia and the enchanted water, and almost all
the major verses, and the prose, and the honor of being
first in such books.
`` This one that follows, '' said the barber, `` is La Diana called second of the
Salamanca; and this one, another that has the same name, whose author is Gil Polo.
`` Well, the one from Salamanca, '' replied the priest, `` accompany and increase the
number of those condemned to the corral, and that of Gil Polo is kept as if
outside of Apollo himself; and come forward, mister compadre, and let's hurry,
that it is getting late.
-This book is -said the barber, opening another- The ten books of Fortune
de Amor, composed by Antonio de Lofraso, Sardinian poet.
`` By the orders I received, '' said the priest, `` that since Apollo was Apollo,
and muses muses, and poets poets, so funny not so crazy
book like that has not been composed, and that, by its way, is the best and the
the most unique of those of this genre that have come to light in the world; and the one
You have not read it, you can make out that you have never read anything of pleasure.
Give it to me here, compadre, what a higher price to have found it than if they gave me one
Slit cassock from Florence.
He set him aside with great pleasure, and the barber went on to say:
-These that follow are El Pastor de Iberia, Ninfas de Henares and
Jealousy disappointments.
`` Well, there is nothing more to do, '' said the priest, `` but to hand them over to the secular arm.
of the mom; And don't ask me why, it would be never ending
-This one who is coming is El Pastor de Fílida.
"He is not that pastor," said the priest, "but a very discreet courtier;" beware
like precious jewel.
-This big one that comes here is entitled -said the barber- Treasure of several
poetry
"As they were not so many," said the priest, "they were more esteemed; need
is that this book weed and clean of some baseness that among its
greatness has. Beware, because its author is a friend of mine, and out of respect for
other more heroic and uplifting works he has written.
"This is," continued the barber, "El Cancionero de López Maldonado."
"The author of that book, too," replied the priest, "is a great friend of mine, and his
verses in their mouth admire those who hear them; and such is the softness of the voice
with which he sings them, that he enchants. Somewhat long is in eclogues, but never
good it was a lot: beware of the chosen ones. But what book is that
is next to him?
"La Galatea, by Miguel de Cervantes," said the barber.
-That Cervantes has been a great friend of mine for many years, and I know that he is more
versed in misfortunes than in verses. His book has something of a good invention;
proposes something, and concludes nothing: it is necessary to wait for the second part that
promises; perhaps with the emienda he will fully achieve the mercy that now
it is denied; and, while this is seen, keep him a recluse in your
posada, mister compadre.
"May it please me," replied the barber. And here come three, all together: The
Araucana, by Don Alonso de Ercilla; La Austríada, by Juan Rufo, jury of
Córdoba, and El Monserrato, by Cristóbal de Virués, a Valencian poet.
"All those three books," said the priest, "are the best that, in verse
heroic, in Spanish they are written, and can compete with the most
famous of Italy: keep yourselves as the richest garments of poetry you have
Spain.
The priest got tired of seeing more books; and thus, under closed load, he wanted everyone
the others were burned; but the barber already had one open, his name was
Angelica's tears.
`` Cry them myself, '' said the priest, hearing the name, `` if such a book had
commanded to burn; because its author was one of the famous poets of the world, not
only from Spain, and he was very happy in translating some of the fables of
Ovid.
Chapter VII. Of the second departure of our good knight Don Quixote from
La Mancha
While at this, Don Quixote began to shout, saying:
"Here, here, brave gentlemen; here it is necessary to show the strength of
your brave arms, that the courtiers bear the best of the tournament.
By attending this noise and roar, the scrutiny was not passed
of the other books that remained; and thus, it is believed that they went to the fire, without
be seen or heard, La Carolea y León de España, with Los Hechos del
Emperor, composed of Don Luis de Ávila, who, without a doubt, must have been
among those who remained; and perhaps, if the priest saw them, they would not go through so
rigorous sentence.
When they reached Don Quixote, he was already out of bed, and
went on in their voices and in their follies, stabbing and reversing
everywhere, being as awake as if he had never slept.
They embraced with him, and by force they returned to him to the bed; and, after there was
calmed a little, turning to speak to the priest, he said:
-By the way, Archbishop Turpín, which is a great decline of those who
we call twelve pairs to leave, so without further ado, take the victory from this
tournament to the courtly knights, having we the adventurers
won the prez in the three days antecedents.
`` Be quiet, mister compadre, '' said the priest, `` God will be served
that luck changes, and that what is lost today is won tomorrow; and attend
your mercy to his health for now, it seems to me that he must be
too tired, if it is not already misused.
`` Ferido no, '' said Don Quixote, `` but crushed and broken, there is no doubt that
it; because that bastard Don Roldán has beaten me to death with the
trunk of an oak, and all of envy, because he sees that I am only the
opposite of their bravery. But I would not call myself Reinaldos de Montalbán if,
in getting up from this bed, I will not pay myself, despite all his
enchantments; And, for now, bring me some food, I know what is the most
he will make the case with me, and keep the revenge thing on my charge.
They did it there: they fed him, and he fell asleep again, and they,
admired of his madness.
That night the mistress burned and burned how many books were in the corral and in
the whole house, and such must have burned that they deserved to be kept in perpetual
records; but his luck and the laziness of the scrutinizer did not allow it; and so,
the saying was fulfilled in them that they pay at times just for
sinners.
One of the remedies that the priest and the barber gave, at that time, for the
bad of his friend, was that they wall and wall the room of books,
because when he got up he would not find them - perhaps removing the cause, he would cease
the effect-, and say that a charmer had taken them, and the
room and everything; and so it was done with great alacrity. In two days it will be
Don Quixote got up, and the first thing he did was go to
see your books; and, since he could not find the room where I had left him,
I went from one place to another looking for him. I got to where I used to have the
door, and I would feel it with my hands, and I would go back and roll my eyes all over,
without saying a word; but, after a good piece, he asked his mistress that
towards what part was the room of his books. The mistress, who was already
well advised of what to answer, she said:
"What room, or what nothing, is your grace looking for?" There is no more room or
books in this house, because everything was taken by the devil himself.
`` He was not a devil, '' replied the niece, `` but a charmer who came on a
cloud one night, after the day your mercy left here, and,
dismounting from a serpent in which a knight came, he entered the room, and
I know what was done inside, that after a few pieces flew through the
roof, and left the house full of smoke; and, when we agree to look at what
It was done, we did not see a book or any room; we only remember very
good to me and to the mistress who, at the time that old evil parted, said in
loud voices that, due to a secret enmity that had the owner of those
books and room, he left the damage done in that house that later
would see. He also said that his name was the wise Muñatón.
"Frestón would say," said Don Quixote.
"I don't know," replied the mistress, "if his name was Frestón or Fritón; I just know that it's over
in ton his name.
"That's right," said Don Quixote; that he is a charming sage, a great enemy
mine, who haunts me, because he knows from his arts and letters that I have
come, as the times go, to fight in a singular battle with a knight at
whom he favors, and I have to defeat him, without him being able to hinder him, and
For this reason he tries to make me all the troubles he can; and what about me?
He will be unable to contradict or avoid what is ordained by heaven.
- Who doubts that? said the niece. But who gets your
mercy, mister uncle, in those quarrels? Wouldn't it be better to be peaceful in
home and not go out into the world looking for trash bread, without considering
that many go for wool and return three-rent?
`` Oh my niece, '' replied Don Quixote, `` and how bad you are at the
bill! First of all, they'll cut me off, I'll have the
beards to those who imagine touching me on the end of a single hair.
The two did not want to reply to him any more, because they saw that his
anger.
It is, therefore, the case that he spent fifteen days at home very calm, without giving
signs of wanting to follow his first flings, in which days he spent
hilarious stories with his two compadres the priest and the barber, about
He said the thing the world needed the most was knights
andantes and that the errant cavalry would be resurrected in it. The priest
sometimes he contradicted him and other times he conceded, because if he did not keep this
Artifice, there was no being able to find out with him.
At this time, Don Quixote requested a neighboring farmer, a man of
well -if this title can be given to the poor-, but very little
salt in the noodle. In resolution, he told him so much, he persuaded him so much and
promised, that the poor villain was determined to get away with him and serve as
squire. Among other things, Don Quixote told him to get ready to go
with him willingly, because perhaps an adventure could happen to him that he would win,
in take away those straws, some insula, and leave him as governor
della. With these promises and others such, Sancho Panza, who was called
the farmer, left his wife and children and settled as a squire for his neighbor.
Don Quixote then gave orders to look for money; and, selling one thing and
pawning another, and wasting them all, a reasonable amount arrived.
He made himself comfortable with a buckler, which he borrowed from a friend, and,
Arming his broken headpiece as best he could, he warned his squire Sancho
of the day and time he planned to set out, so that he could accommodate
of what he saw that he needed the most. Above all, he commissioned him to carry
saddlebags; And he said that he would take, and that anxiously he thought to take a donkey
which was very good, because he was not inclined to walk much. In
don Quixote noticed a little, wondering if he remembered if some
knight errant had brought squire knight assnally, but never
some came to memory; but, with all this, he determined that I take him, with
budget to accommodate him of more honorable cavalry in having occasion
to do so, taking the horse away from the first rude knight he came across.
He provided himself with shirts and other things that he could, according to the advice
that the innkeeper had given him; all of which done and accomplished, without saying goodbye
Belly of his children and wife, nor Don Quixote of his mistress and niece, one night
they left the place without anyone seeing them; in which they walked
so much so that at dawn they were sure they would not find them
even if they were looking for them.
Sancho Panza rode on his donkey like a patriarch, with his saddlebags and his
boot, and with much desire to see himself already governor of the island that his master
had promised. Don Quixote was right to take the same defeat and path that
the one he had taken on his first trip, which was through the Montiel field,
through which I walked with less regret than last time, because, for
be the morning time and the sun's rays hurt them sideways, do not
fatigued. In this Sancho Panza said to his master:
-Look at your mercy, sir knight errant, do not forget what
from the island he has promised me; that I will know how to govern it, no matter how great
be.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-You must know, friend Sancho Panza, that it was a very used custom of the
ancient knights errant make their squires rulers of the
islands or kingdoms that won, and I am determined that
so grateful custom; before, I plan to get ahead of it: because they
sometimes, and perhaps most, they waited for their squires to go
old; and, after tired of serving and having bad days and worse
nights, they were given some title of count, or, at most, of marquis, of
some valley or province from little more to less; but, if you live and I live,
It could well be that within six days I won such a kingdom that I had
others to him adherents, who came from a mold to crown you king of one
of them. And do not have it to much, what things and cases happen to such
gentlemen, in ways so never seen or thought of, that you can easily
I could give even more than I promise you.
"That way," answered Sancho Panza, "if I were a king by some miracle
Of those that your grace says, at least, Juana Gutiérrez, my hear it,
I would become queen, and my children infants.
-Well, who doubts it? Don Quixote answered.
"I doubt it," replied Sancho Panza; because I have for me that, although
God rained kingdoms on earth, none would settle well on the
head of Mari Gutiérrez. Know, sir, that it is not worth two maravedís for
Queen; Countess will like him better, and even God and help.
`` You entrust it to God, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that He will give what
It suits him better, but do not lower your spirits so much, that you come to be happy
with less than with being ahead.
"I won't, my lord," answered Sancho; and more having such a main master
at your mercy, who will know how to give me everything that is good for me and I
can carry.
Chapter VIII. Of the good success that the courageous Don Quixote had in the
frightening and never imagined adventure of the windmills, with other
events worthy of happy remembrance
In this, they discovered thirty or forty windmills that are in that
countryside; And, just as Don Quixote saw them, he said to his squire:
-Good luck guiding our things better than we were right to wish,
because you see there, friend Sancho Panza, where thirty, or few
more, outrageous giants, with whom I intend to do battle and take
all the lives, with whose spoils we will begin to enrich; That this is
good war, and it is a great service of God to remove such bad seed from
the face of the earth.
-What giants? -said Sancho Panza.
`` Those you see there, '' replied his master, `` with long arms,
some are usually almost two leagues long.
`` Look at your mercy, '' answered Sancho, `` that those who look alike there are not
they are giants, but windmills, and what in them look like arms are
the blades, which, turned from the wind, make the millstone move.
`` It seems well, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that you are not trained in this
adventures: they are giants; and if you are afraid, get out of there, and get
in prayer in the space that I am going to enter with them in fierce and unequal
battle.
And, saying this, he spurred his horse Rocinante, ignoring the
voices that his squire Sancho gave him, warning him that, without a doubt,
they were windmills, and not giants, those that he was going to attack. But
he was so set that they were giants, that he did not even hear the voices of his squire
Sancho didn't even notice, although he was already very close, what they were; before,
he was saying in loud voices:
-Non fuyades, cowards and vile creatures, that only one knight is the one who
it strikes you.
At this a little wind rose and the great blades began to
move, which, seen by Don Quixote, said:
-Well, even if you move more arms than the giant Briareo, you have
to pay.
And, in saying this, and commending himself with all his heart to his mistress Dulcinea,
asking him to help him in such a trance, well covered with his rodela, with
the spear at the ready, he lashed out at Rocinante's full gallop and charged
with the first mill that was in front; and, throwing him in the
the blade, the wind turned it with such fury that it made the spear to pieces,
taking after him the horse and the knight, who was rolling very battered
by the Countryside. Sancho Panza came to help him, all the way through his
donkey, and when he arrived he found that he could not move: such was the blow that
with him Rocinante.
-God help me! Sancho said. Didn't I tell your mercy to look
well what he did, they were nothing but windmills, and he couldn't
ignore but who carried other such in the head?
`` Hush, friend Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` the things of the war,
more than others, they are subject to continuous change; the more, that I think,
and it is thus true, that that wise Frestón who stole my room and
books has turned these giants into mills for taking away the glory of their
expiration: such is the enmity he has for me; but, after all, they have to
little power their evil arts against the goodness of my sword.
"God do the best you can," answered Sancho Panza.
And, helping him to get up, he climbed again on Rocinante, who half
he was backless. And, speaking in the past adventure, they followed the path
from Puerto Lapice, because there Don Quixote said that it was not possible to leave
to find many and diverse adventures, for being a very temporary place; otherwise
that he was very sorry for having lacked the spear; and, telling your
squire, said:
-I remember reading that a Spanish gentleman named Diego Pérez de
Vargas, having broken his sword in a battle, broke off an oak
a heavy branch or log, and with it he did such things that day, and crushed
so many Moors, that he was nicknamed Machuca, and thus he and his
Descendants were called, from that day forward, Vargas and Machuca.
I have said this, because of the first oak or oak that comes my way
I intend to break off another log as good as that one, which I imagine and
I intend to do such feats with him, that you consider yourself to be very fortunate
to have deserved to come to see them and to be a witness of things that they will hardly be able to
be believed.
"To the hand of God," said Sancho; I believe everything as well as your mercy
it says; but straighten up a bit, that seems to go half way, and should
to be from the grinding of the fall.
"That is the truth," answered Don Quixote; and if I do not complain about the pain, it is
for it is not given to knights errant to complain of any injury,
even if his guts come out because of it.
-If that is so, I have no reason to reply -answered Sancho-, but God knows
If I was glad that your grace complained when something
hurt. I know how to say that I have to complain about the smallest pain that
have, if you no longer understand also with the squires of the knights
errant that of not complaining.
Don Quixote did not stop laughing at the simplicity of his squire; and so,
declared that he could very well complain, as and when he wanted, unwillingly or
she; that until then he had not read anything to the contrary in the order of
chivalry. Sancho told him to see that it was time to eat. He answered his
I love that at that time I didn't need him; that he eat when
whimper. With this license, Sancho settled down as best he could on his
donkey, and taking out of the saddlebags what he had put in them, he went
walking and eating behind his master very out of his space, and from time to time
when he raised his boot, with so much pleasure, that he could envy the most
gifted winemaker from Malaga. And while he was going that way
many drinks, he did not remember any promise that his master
I would have done, nor had I for any work, but for a lot of rest, to walk
looking for adventures, no matter how dangerous.
In resolution, that night they passed it among some trees, and from one
Don Quixote broke from them a dry bouquet that could almost serve as a spear,
And he put in it the iron that he took from the one that had been broken. All
Don Quixote did not sleep that night, thinking of his mistress Dulcinea, for
conform to what he had read in his books, when the gentlemen
many nights passed without sleep in the forests and unpopulated,
entertained with the memories of their ladies. Sancho Panza did not spend it there,
that, as her stomach was full, and not with chicory water, from a dream she
took it all; and they were not part to wake him up, if his master did not call him,
the rays of the sun, which hit his face, nor the song of the birds, which,
many and very rejoicing, the coming of the new day greeted. To the
getting up he gave his boot a touch, and found it a little skinnier than night
before; and his heart ached, because it seemed to him that they were not
so quickly remedy their lack. Don Quixote did not want to have breakfast, because,
As has been said, it was sustained by tasty memories. They returned to their
started on the way to Puerto Lapice, and at three o'clock
they discovered.
`` Here, '' said Don Quixote, seeing him, `` Brother Sancho Panza, we can put
hands up to the elbows in what they call adventure. But warn that,
even if you see me in the greatest dangers in the world, you must not put your hand on your
sword to defend me, if you no longer see that those who offend me are scoundrels and
low people, who in such a case you can very well help me; but if they were
Gentlemen, it is in no way lawful or granted to you by the laws of
cavalry help me, until you are knighted.
"By the way, sir," answered Sancho, "may your mercy be very well
obeyed in this; and more, that I of mine I am peaceful and enemy of
get into noises or quarrels. It is true that, as far as
defend my person, I will not have much account with those laws, because the
divine and human allow each one to defend themselves from whoever they want
wrong you.
"I am not saying less," replied Don Quixote; but, in helping me against
Gentlemen, you must keep your natural momentum at bay.
`` I say that I will do so, '' answered Sancho, `` and that I will keep that precedent so
well like Sunday.
Being in these reasons, two friars of the order of
Saint Benedict, knights on two dromedaries: not two were smaller
mules in which they came. They brought their cravings road and sun umbrellas. Behind
a car came from them, with four or five horsemen accompanying it and
two mule handlers on foot. He came in the car, as it later became known, a
Biscayan lady, who was going to Seville, where her husband was, who was going to
the Indies with a very honorable position. The friars did not come with her, although
they went the same way; But, Don Quixote hardly saw them when he said to his
squire:
-Either I'm mistaken, or this has to be the most famous adventure ever seen;
because those black lumps that seem there must be, and are without
doubt, some charmers who have stolen a princess in that
car, and it is necessary to undo this one-eyed man to all my might.
"This will be worse than the windmills," said Sancho. Look, sir, what
Those are friars of San Benito, and the car must be of some people
fleeting. Look what I say, take a good look at what you do, don't be the devil who
cheat.
`` I have already told you, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that you know little about ailment.
of adventures; what I say is true, and now you will see.
And, saying this, he stepped forward and stood in the middle of the road where
the friars were coming, and, coming so close that it seemed to him that
They could hear what he said, in a loud voice he said:
-Devil and huge people, then immediately leave the tall princesses
that in that car you are forced; if not, get ready to receive a loan
death, as a just punishment for your bad deeds.
The friars held the reins, and were amazed, as well as the figure
Don Quixote and their reasons, to which they responded:
-Sir knight, we are not devilish or huge, but two
religious of San Benito that we are on our way, and we do not know if in this
car come, or not, no forced princesses.
-For me there are no soft words, I already know you, fementida
scoundrel, 'said Don Quixote.
And, without waiting for any further response, he stung Rocinante and, the spear lowered, lunged
against the first friar, with such fury and boldness that, if the friar did not
let him fall from the mule, he made him come to the ground ill of his degree, and even
misused, if he did not drop dead. The second religious, who saw in the way that
treated his companion, put legs to the castle of his good mule, and
he began to run through that campaign, lighter than the wind itself.
Sancho Panza, who saw the friar on the ground, alighting slightly from his
ass, lunged at him and began to remove his habits. They came in this
two young men of the friars and asked him why he was undressing.
Sancho answered them that it was his turn, just like offal.
of the battle that his lord Don Quixote had won. The waiters, no
They knew of mockery, nor did they understand that of spoils or battles, seeing that
Don Quixote was already diverted from there, talking to those who in the car
They came, attacked Sancho and found him on the ground; and, without leaving him
hair in his beard, they kicked him ground and left him lying on the ground
without breath or meaning. And, without stopping a point, the friar climbed back up,
all fearful and cowed and without color in the face; and, when he saw
horse, bit after his companion, that a good space there was
waiting, and waiting for what the shock would stop at; and, unintentionally
awaiting the end of all that begun event, they continued on their way,
making more crosses than if they carried the devil on their backs.
Don Quixote was, as has been said, talking to the lady in the car,
telling him:
-Your beauty, my lady, can make out of her person what she loves the most.
come in spirit, because the pride of your robbers already lies by the
ground, knocked down by this my strong arm; and, why don't you grieve for knowing the
name of your liberator, know that my name is Don Quixote de la
Mancha, knight errant and adventurer, and captive of the peerless and beautiful
Dona Dulcinea del Toboso; and, in payment of the benefit that you have from me
received, I do not want anything else but that you return to Toboso, and that from me
present yourself to this lady and tell her what for your freedom I have
date.
All this that Don Quixote said was heard by a squire of those who the car
They accompanied, who was from Biscay; which, seeing that he did not want to miss the
car ahead, but said that then he had to go around the Toboso,
He went to Don Quixote and, seizing him by the lance, said to him, in a bad tongue
Castilian and worse Biscayan, in this way:
-Come on, gentleman, how bad you are; for the God who created me, that, if you don't let
car, so you kill yourself as you are there vizcaíno.
Don Quixote understood him very well, and calmly replied:
-If you were a gentleman, as you are not, I would have already punished your stupidity and
daring, captive creature.
To which the Biscayan replied:
-Not me, gentleman? I swear to God you lie as a Christian. If he throws
you throw and sword you draw, the water how quickly you will see that you carry the cat!
Vizcaíno by land, nobleman by sea, nobleman by the devil; and you lie that
see if you say something else.
-Now you can see it, said Agrajes! Don Quixote answered.
And, throwing the spear on the ground, he drew his sword and embraced his buckler, and
He attacked the Biscayan with determination to take his life. The Biscayan,
that is how he saw him coming, even though he wanted to get off the mule, that, being of
bad rent, she was not to be trusted, she could not do anything else
but draw his sword; but let him know well that he was found next to the car,
where he could take a pillow that served as a shield, and then they left the
one for the other, as if they were two mortal enemies. Other people
He would like to put them at peace, but he could not, because the Biscayan said in his bad
reasons that if they did not let him finish his battle, that he himself had
to kill his mistress and all the people who hinder him. The lady of the
car, admired and fearful of what she saw, made the coachman turn aside
from there a little, and from afar he began to watch the rigorous contest, in
the speech of which the Biscayan gave Don Quixote a great stab
over one shoulder, over the buckler, which, to give it to him without defense,
open to the waist. Don Quixote, who felt the sorrow of that
outrageous blow, gave a great voice, saying:
-Oh lady of my soul, Dulcinea, flower of beauty, help this
your gentleman, who, to satisfy your great goodness, in this
rigorous trance is found!
To say this, and to clench the sword, and to cover himself well with his buckler, and
attacking the Biscayan, everything was in a time, carrying determination to
risk it all in one fell swoop.
The Biscayan, who thus saw him coming against him, understood well by his boldness
his courage, and determined to do the same as Don Quixote; and so he waited for him
well covered with his pillow, without being able to surround the mule to one or the other
part; that already, out of sheer tiredness and not done to such trivialities, she couldn't
take a step.
Thus, as has been said, Don Quixote came against the cautious Biscayan, with the
sword held high, with determination to open it in the middle, and the Biscayan
he waited anxiously, his sword raised and wrapped with his pillow, and all
the bystanders were fearful and hung up on what was to happen
of those big blows with which they were threatened; and the lady in the car and
the other maids of hers were making a thousand vows and offers to all
the images and houses of devotion of Spain, because God freed his
squire and them of that great danger in which they were.
But there is the damage of all this that at this point and term leaves pending
the author of this story this battle, apologizing that he found no more
written of these exploits of Don Quixote of which he leaves mentioned. Well it is
It is true that the second author of this work did not want to believe how curious
history was given over to the laws of oblivion, nor that they had been
so little curious were the mills of La Mancha that they did not have in their archives
or on their desks some papers that this famous gentleman was dealing with; and
thus, with this imagination, he did not despair of finding the end of this peaceful
history, which, heaven being favorable to him, found him in the way that
will count in the second part.
Second part of the ingenious hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha
Chapter IX. Where the stupendous battle that he
gallardo vizcaíno and the brave manchego had
We leave in the first part of this story the brave Biscayan and the famous
Don Quixote with his tall and naked swords, in the guise of unloading two
furious fendings, such that, if they were right, at least
they would divide and defend up and down and open like a grenade; and
that at that point so doubtful stopped and was dethroned so tasty
history, without the author telling us where to find what
della was missing.
This caused me great sorrow, because the pleasure of having read so little was
returned in disgust, to think the wrong way that was offered to find what
much that, in my opinion, was missing from such a tasty tale. It seemed to me
impossible and out of all good habit that such a good gentleman
it would have been missing a wise man who would take charge of writing his never seen
feats, which none of the knights errant lacked,
of what people say
who go on their adventures,
because each one of them had one or two wise men, as of mold, who did not
they only wrote their facts, but painted their smallest
thoughts and trifles, however hidden they might be; and it was not to be
so unfortunate, such a good gentleman, that he lacked what was left over
Platir and others like them. And so, I could not be inclined to believe that so
gallant history would have been blemished and spoiled; and blamed
the malignancy of time, devourer and consumer of all things, the
which, or had it hidden or consumed.
On the other hand, it seemed to me that, since among his books they had been found so
modern ones such as Jealousy Disappointment and Ninfas y Pastores de Henares, who
also its history must be modern; and what, since it was not
written, it would be in the memory of the people of his village and of
surrounding. This imagination made me confused and eager to know, real and
truly, all the life and miracles of our famous Spanish gift
Quixote de la Mancha, light and mirror of the La Mancha cavalry, and the first
that in our age and in these dire times he went to work and
exercise of the errant arms, and in defying grievances, helping widows,
protect maidens, of those who walked with their whips and stilt houses, and
with all her virginity on her shoulders, from mountain to mountain and from valley to valley;
that, if it was not that some mess, or some villain of ax and chapel, or
some huge giant forced them, maiden there was in the past
that, after eighty years, that in all of them he did not sleep a day under
roof, and went as whole to the grave as the mother who had
calved. I say, then, that, for these and many other respects, it is worthy
our gallant Quixote of continuous and memorable praise; and not even me
I must be denied, for the work and diligence that I put into seeking the end
this nice story; Although I know well that if the sky, the case and the
fortune do not help me, the world will be lacking and without hobby and taste
that well almost two hours will be able to have the one who carefully reads it. Step,
Well, finding it this way:
While I was in the Alcaná de Toledo one day, a boy came to sell some
old folders and papers to a merry-go-round; and, as I am fond of reading,
even if they are the torn papers of the streets, taken from my natural
bowed, I took a folder of the kind the boy was selling, and vile with
characters that I knew to be Arabic. And, since, although I knew them, I did not
I knew how to read them, I was looking to see if there seemed some Moorish aljamiado there
read them; and it was not very difficult to find such an interpreter, well,
even if he looked for a better and older language, he would find him. Anyway,
luck gave me one, that, telling him my wish and putting the book in
She opened her hands in the middle, and, reading a little into it, she began to laugh.
I asked him what he was laughing at, and he replied that there was one thing
that book written in the margin by annotation. I told him to tell me; and
he, without leaving the laughter, said:
-It is, as I said, here in the margin written this: "This Dulcinea del
Toboso, so many times in this story referred to, they say that he had the best
hand to salt pigs than another woman from all over La Mancha. "
When I heard "Dulcinea del Toboso" say, I was stunned and suspended, because
later it was represented to me that those folders contained the story of
Don Quixote. With this imagination, I hastened him to read the beginning, and,
doing so, suddenly turning the Arabic into Spanish, he said that
It said: History of Don Quixote de la Mancha, written by Cide Hamete
Benengeli, Arabian historian. Much discretion was required to
hide the joy I received when the title of the
book; and, skipping the silk shop, I bought the boy all the papers and
folders by royal means; What if he had discretion and knew what
I wanted them, it could well be promised and take more than six reales from the
purchase. Then I parted with the Moor through the cloister of the main church,
and I begged him to return me those folders, all those that dealt with don
Quixote, in Spanish, without taking away or adding anything to them,
offering him whatever pay he wanted. He was content with two arrobas of raisins and
two bushels of wheat, and promised to translate them well and faithfully and with
very brief. But I, for making the business easier and for not stopping
hand such a good find, I took him to my house, where in a little more than a month and
half translated it all, in the same way that it refers here.
It was in the first folder, painted very naturally, the battle of Don
Quixote with the Biscayan, placed in the same position as history
account, swords raised, the one covered with his rodela, the other with the
pillow, and the mule of the Biscayan so alive, that it was showing
rental at crossbow shooting. The Biscayan had a title written at his feet
that said: Don Sancho de Azpetia, which, without a doubt, must be his name, and
at Rocinante's feet was another who said: Don Quixote. Was
Wonderfully painted rocinante, so long and stretched, so dimmed and
skinny, with so much spine, so confirmed hectic, that he showed the
discovered with how much warning and propriety the
Rocinante's name. Next to him was Sancho Panza, who had a halter
to his donkey, at the feet of which was another label that read: Sancho Zancas,
and it must be that he had, as the painting showed, a big belly,
the short waist and the long stringers; and for this it should have been named
of Panza and of Zancas, who with these two nicknames sometimes calls him
the history. Some other trifles had to be noted, but all are
of little importance and that ignore the true relationship of the
history; that none is bad as it is true.
If any objection can be made to it close to its truth, it will not be able to
be another but to have been its Arabic author, being very typical of those of
that nation be liars; although, for being so our enemies, before
it can be understood to have been lacking in it than too much. And so I
It seems to me, then, when I could and should extend the pen in the
praises of such a good gentleman, it seems that industry passes them in
silence: badly done and worse thought, having and should be the
specific, true, and not at all passionate historians, and that neither the
interest or fear, rancor or hobby, do not make you twist
path of truth, whose mother is history, emula of time, deposit
of the actions, witness of the past, example and warning of the present,
warning of things to come. In this I know that all that I know will be found
I will be right to wish in the most peaceful; and if something good in her is missing, stop
I have that it was because of the greyhound of its author, rather than because of the lack of
subject. In short, its second part, following the translation, began with
way:
Put up and lifted high the slicing swords of the two brave and
angry combatants, it seemed only that they were threatening the sky,
the earth and the abyss: such was the boldness and continent that they had. And the
The first to unload the blow was the angry Biscayan, who was
given with such force and such fury that, unless the sword was
way, that single blow was enough to end his rigorous
fight and all the adventures of our knight; but the good
luck, which for greater things had in store for him, twisted the sword of his
On the contrary, so that, although it hit him in the left shoulder, it did not
other damage than to disarm all that side, taking a large part
of the headpiece, with half of the ear; that all this with dreadful ruin
it came to the ground, leaving him very battered.
Oh my God, and who will be the one who can now tell the rage
that entered the heart of our manchego, seeing himself stop from that
way! Say no more, but it was in such a way that it rose again in the
stirrups, and, tightening the sword in both hands, with such fury
landed on the Biscayan, hitting him squarely on the pillow and on
the head, which, without being part of such a good defense, as if it fell on him
a mountain, began to pour blood from his nostrils, and from his mouth and from
ears, and to show signs of falling from the mule below, from where it fell, without
doubt, if he did not hug himself with his neck; but, with all that, he took his feet off
stirrups and then released her arms; and the mule, scared of the terrible
hit, he ran across the field, and a few bucks he found his owner in
Earth.
He was calmly looking at Don Quixote, and as he saw him fall,
jumped off his horse and very lightly approached him, and, putting the
point of the sword in the eyes, told him to surrender; if not, what will
I would cut off the head. The Biscayan was so disturbed that he could not answer
word, and he would have a hard time, as Don Quixote was blind, if the ladies
of the car, which until then with great dismay had watched the dispute,
they did not go to where he was and asked him with great urgency to do
such a great mercy and favor to spare the life of his squire. To the Which
Don Quixote replied, with great tone and gravity:
-By the way, beautiful ladies, I am very happy to do what I
you ask; but it has to be with a condition and concert, and it is that this gentleman
He has to promise me to go to the place of Toboso and appear for me before
the unparalleled Dona Dulcinea, so that she can do with him what is most of her
Will.
The fearful and heartbroken lady, without taking into account what
Quixote asked, and without asking who Dulcinea was, he promised that the
Squire would do everything that was commanded from him.
-Well, in faith of that word, I won't hurt him anymore, since he had it on me.
well deserved.
Chapter X. Of what happened the most to Don Quixote with the Biscayan, and of
danger in which he was seen with a mob of Yangües
Already at this time Sancho Panza had risen, somewhat mistreated by the
young men of the friars, and had been attentive to the battle of his lord don
Quixote, and begged God in his heart to be served to give him victory and that
in it some island would gain from where it made him governor, as it
had promised. Seeing, then, that the quarrel was over, and that his master was returning
to climb on Rocinante, he came to have the stirrup; and before he went up he
knelt in front of him, and, seizing his hand, kissed it and
said:
May your mercy be served, my Lord Don Quixote, to give me the government of
the island that in this rigorous quarrel has been won; that, however big
I mean, I feel strong enough to know how to govern it as well as another
who has ruled islands in the world.
To which Don Quixote replied:
- Warn, brother Sancho, that this adventure and those similar to it
They are adventures of islands, but of crossroads, in which you do not win
Another thing to get a broken head or one less ear. Be patient, what
adventures will be offered where not only can I make you governor, but
later.
Sancho thanked him very much, and, kissing again the hand and the skirt of the
loriga, helped him to climb on Rocinante; and he got on his donkey and
began to follow his lord, who, at a jerky pace, without saying goodbye or speaking
more with those of the car, it was entered through a forest that there was next.
Sancho followed him at the full trot of his donkey, but he walked so much
Rocinante who, seeing himself left behind, was forced to shout to his master that
be expected. Don Quixote did so, taking the reins from Rocinante
until his weary squire arrived, who, on arriving, said to him:
-I seem to me, sir, that it would be wise to go and retreat to some church; that,
as the one with whom you fought was battered, it will not be much that they give
news of the case to the Holy Brotherhood and they arrest us; already faith that yes
They do, that first we get out of jail that the hopo has to sweat us.
"Hush," said Don Quixote. And where have you seen, or ever read, that
knight errant has been brought to justice, for more homicides than
would have committed?
-I don't know anything about omelets -answered Sancho-, nor in my life did I
none; I only know that the Holy Brotherhood has to do with those who fight in
the field, and in this I do not interfere.
`` Well, don't be sorry, friend, '' answered Don Quixote, `` I'll get you out of
the hands of the Chaldeans, how much more of those of the Brotherhood. But tell me why
your life: have you seen a braver knight than I in all that has been discovered
the earth? Have you read in stories another that has or has had more verve
in attacking, more encouragement in persevering, more skill in wounding, no more
skill in knocking down?
-The truth be -answered Sancho- that I have not read any history
never, because I neither know how to read nor write; but what I will dare to bet is that more
daring I love that your mercy I have not served you in all my days
life, and God willing that these dares are not paid where I have
saying. What I beg of your mercy is that he be cured, that he is doing a lot
blood from that ear; that here I bring lint and a little white ointment in
saddlebags.
`` All that would be well excused, '' answered Don Quixote, `` if I was
remember to make a vial of Fierabrás balsam, which with just one
gout will save time and medicines.
"What vial and what balm is that?" -said Sancho Panza.
`` It is a balm, '' replied Don Quixote, `` for whom I have the recipe in the
memory, with which there is no fear of death, nor is there to think
die of any kind. And so, when I do it and give it to you, you have no more
what to do but, when you see that in some battle I have been
middle of the body (as often happens), beautifully the part
of the body that has fallen on the ground, and with much subtlety, before
the blood is gone, you will put it on the other half that will remain in the chair,
warning of fitting it equally and to the just; then you will give me to drink
just two gulps of the balm I said, and you'll see me get healthier than
an Apple.
`` If there is, '' said Panza, `` I will resign from here the government of the
promised island, and I do not want anything else, in payment of my many good
services, but may your grace give me the recipe for that beloved liquor;
that for me I have that an ounce will be worth anywhere more than two reales, and not
I have needed more to pass this life honestly and restfully. But it is
to know now if the hacelle has a lot of cost.
-With less than three reales you can make three azoures -answered Don
Quixote.
"Sinner of me!" Sancho replied. Well, what is your grace waiting for
Hacelle ya teach me?
`` Hush, friend, '' answered Don Quixote, `` what greater secrets do I think?
teach you and give you greater favors; and, for now, let's heal, that the ear
It hurts more than I want.
Sancho took out of the saddlebags lint and ointment. But when Don Quixote arrived
to see his trap broken, he thought to lose his mind, and, putting his hand on the
sword and raising his eyes to heaven, he said:
-I take an oath to the Creator of all things and to the holy four
Gospels, where they are written the longest, of doing the life he did
the great marquis of Mantua when he swore to avenge the death of his nephew
Valdovinos, who was not eating bread to tablecloths, nor with his wife folgar, and
other things that, although I don't remember them, I take them for granted here,
Until I take full revenge on what such a mess I made.
Hearing this, Sancho said to him:
-Your grace, Mr. Don Quixote, warn that if the knight complied
that he was ordered to go and present himself to my lady Dulcinea of ​​the
Toboso, he will have already fulfilled what he owed, and it is not worth another penalty if he does not
commits a new crime.
"You have spoken and aimed very well," answered Don Quixote; and so, I cancel the
oath as far as what it touches to take of the new revenge; but i do and
confirm again to do the life that I have said, until so much
by force another trap as good as this one to some gentleman. And no
Think, Sancho, that I do this like this with the smoke of straws, how well I have who
imitate in it; that this happened, verbatim, on the helmet of
Mambrino, how expensive it cost Sacripante.
`` May your mercy give such oaths to the devil, my lord, '' he replied.
Sancho-; which are very damaging to health and very detrimental to
awareness. If not, tell me now: if in many days we do not meet man
armed with a trap, what are we to do? Is the oath to be fulfilled?
Despite so many inconveniences and discomforts, how will sleep be
dress, and not sleeping in the village, and a thousand other penances that the
oath of that mad old man of the Marquis of Mantua, that your grace
do you want to revalidate now? Look at your mercy well, that for all thesearmed men 
do not walk on the roads , but muleteers and carters, who not only
They do not bring traps, but perhaps they have not heard them named in all the days of
his life.
`` You are fooling yourself, '' said Don Quixote, `` because we will not have been two hours
through these crossroads, when we see more armed than those who came
about Albraca to the conquest of Angelica la Bella.
- Stop, then; So be it, "said Sancho," and God pray that it will happen to us well, and
that the time has come to win this island that costs me so much, and
I die later.
-I have already told you, Sancho, don't give that any care; when
I will miss the island, there is the kingdom of Denmark or that of Soliadisa,
They will come like a glove; and more, that, being on dry land, you owe yourself
more cheer. But let's save this for your time, and see if you bring anything in those
saddlebags that we eat, because then we go in search of a castle where
let us stay tonight and make the balm that I have told you; because I vote for you
God, my ear is hurting a lot.
-Here I bring an onion, and a little cheese and I don't know how many crusts of
bread, said Sancho, but they are not delicacies that belong to so brave
knight as your mercy.
- How bad you understand it! Don Quixote answered. Let you know, Sancho, that
it is the honor of knights errant not to eat for a month; and, as they eat,
whatever they find most at hand; and this would be true if
you would have read as many stories as me; that, although there have been many, in
all of them I have not found a relationship that the knights errant
eat, if it was not by chance and at some sumptuous banquets that were made for them,
and the other days were spent in flowers. And, although it is understood that
they could not do without eating and doing all the other natural necessities,
because, in effect, they were men like us, it must also be understood that,
walking most of the time of his life through the forests and depopulated, and without
cook, that his most ordinary food would be rustic meats, such as
the ones that you now offer me. So, Sancho friend, don't be saddened by what
I like it. You will not want to make a new world, nor take out the cavalry
walking out of his mind.
"Forgive me, your grace," said Sancho; that, as I do not know how to read or
to write, as I have said again, I do not know nor have I fallen into the rules of the
knightly profession; and, from now on, I will provide the saddlebags of
all kinds of dried fruit for your worship, who is a gentleman, and for me
I will provide them, for I am not, with other volatile things and with more substance.
`` I am not saying, Sancho, '' replied Don Quixote, `` that it is forced on the gentlemen
walkers eat nothing but those fruits that you say, but their most
ordinary sustenance must have been from them, and from some herbs they found
through the fields, which they knew and I also know.
"Virtue is," answered Sancho, "to know those herbs; that, as I go
imagining, one day it will be necessary to use that knowledge.
And, taking out, in this, what he said he had, they both ate in good peace and
company. But, eager to find a place to stay that night, they ended up with
his poor and dry food very briefly. Then they mounted on horseback, and
rush to get to town before nightfall; but they lacked the sun, and
the hope of achieving what they wanted, next to some huts of about
goatherds, and thus, they determined to pass it there; how much was sadness
For Sancho not to reach town, his master was happy to put her to sleep at the
uncovered sky, because it seemed to him that every time this happened to him it was to
a possessive act that facilitated the test of his chivalry.
Chapter XI. Of what happened to Don Quixote with some goatherds
He was picked up from the goatherds in good spirits; and, having Sancho, the best
that he could, accommodated to Rocinante and his donkey, he went after the smell that
they gave off certain goat jerky that boiling over the fire in a
cauldron were; and, although he wanted at that very point to see if they were
at the time of transferring them from the cauldron to the stomach, he stopped doing it, because
the goatherds removed them from the fire, and, laying on the ground some skins
of sheep, they prepared their rustic table with great haste and invited the
two, with samples of very good will, with what they had. They sat at the
round of the skins six of them, which were the ones in the sheepfold,
having first, with rude ceremonies, begged Don Quixote to
sit on a dornajo that turned upside down they put him. Sat down don
Quixote, and Sancho remained standing to serve him the glass, which was made of
horn. When his master saw him standing, he said:
-Because you see, Sancho, the good that the errant cavalry contains in itself, and
how down are those who in any ministry of it exercise themselves
come briefly to be honored and esteemed by the world, I want here to my
side and in the company of these good people you feel, and that you are the same thing
with me, that I am your master and natural lord; that you eat on my plate and drink for
where I drink; because of the cavalry errant you can say the same
that of love it is said: that all things equal.
-Great mercy! -said Sancho-; but I know how to say at your mercy that, like me
I had well to eat, so well and better I would eat it standing up and on my own
like sitting next to an emperor. And yet, if he is to tell the truth, a lot
I better know what I eat in my corner, without gimmicks or respects, although
let it be bread and onion, that the chicken bucks from other tables where it is forced
chew slowly, drink little, wipe often, do not sneeze or cough if
It suits me, nor do other things that loneliness and freedom bring
with him. I long for, my lord, these honors that your grace wants to give me
for being a minister and adherent of the cavalry errant, as I am being
squire of your mercy, turn them into other things that are too much for me
comfortable and useful; that these, although I consider them well received, the
I resign for from here to the end of the world.
-With all that, you have to sit down; because who humbles himself, God
praises.
And, seizing him by the arm, he forced him to sit down next to him.
The goatherds did not understand that gibberish of squires and knights
walking, and did nothing but eat and be silent, and look at their
guests, who, with much grace and grace, packed beefsteak like a fist.
When the meat service was finished, they spread a large quantity of
hazelnut acorns, and together they put a half cheese, harder than if
was made of mortar. The horn was not idle in this, because
walked around so often (already full, now empty, like the arcadure of
Ferris wheel) that easily emptied a zaque of two that were in evidence.
After Don Quixote had satisfied his stomach, he took a handful of
acorns in his hand, and, looking at them attentively, uttered his voice to similar
reasons:
Blessed age and blessed centuries are those whom the ancients put
name of gold, and not because in them gold, which in this our age of
iron is so much esteemed, it was reached in that fortuitous without fatigue
some, but because then those who lived in it ignored these two
words of yours and mine. In that holy age were all common things;
it was not necessary for anybody, in order to achieve his ordinary sustenance, to take another
work to raise my hand and reach him from the robust oaks, which
they were liberally inviting them with their sweet and spicy fruit. The
clear sources and streams rivers, in magnificent abundance, tasty and
transparent waters offered them. In the bankruptcies of the rocks and in what
the hollow of the trees formed their republic the solicitous and discreet
bees, offering to any hand, without interest, the fertile harvest
of his sweet work. The brave cork oaks waved goodbye, without
other artifice than that of his courtesy, his wide and light bark, with
that the houses began to be covered, on rustic stakes supported,
no more than to defend against the inclemencies of the sky. Everything was peace
then, all friendship, all harmony; had not yet dared the heavy
grating of the corvo plowed to open or visit the pious entrails of our
first mother, that she, without being forced, offered, by all the parts of
her fertile and spacious bosom, which could fill, sustain, and delight
the children who owned it then. So yes, the simple and
beautiful zagalejas from valley to valley and from hillock to hillock, in braid and in
hair, without more dresses than those that were necessary to cover
honestly what honesty wants and has always wanted to be covered;
and it was not their ornaments that are now used, to whom the purple of Tire
and the martyred silk in so many ways becomes more expensive, but of some leaves
greens of burdocks and ivy woven together, with which perhaps they were so pompous
and composed as our courtesans go with the rare and pilgrims
inventions that idle curiosity has shown them. Then they decorated
the loving concepts of the soul simply and simply, in the same way and
the way she conceived them, without looking for an artificial detour of words to
make them more expensive. There was no fraud, deception, or malice mixed with
truth and simplicity. Justice was on its own terms, without
dare to disturb or offend those of favor and those of interest, who so much
now they undermine, disturb and persecute her. The law of lace had not yet been
sitting on the understanding of the judge, because then there was nothing to judge,
nor who was judged. The maidens and honesty walked, as I have
said, everywhere, alone and mistress, without fear that the other's
and lascivious intent diminished him, and his downfall was born of his taste and
own will. And now, in these our detestable centuries, it is not
safe none, even if I hide it and close another new maze like the one in
Crete; because there, through the cracks or through the air, with the zeal of the
damn solicitude, the loving pestilence enters them and makes them find
all his recollection to the fret. For whose safety, walking more
times and growing malice, the order of knights was instituted
wandering, to defend the maidens, protect the widows and aid the
orphans and the needy. This order is me, brothers goatherds, to
who I appreciate the gasage and good welcome that you do to me and me
squire; that, although by natural law all those who live are obliged to
favor knights errant, still, by knowing that without knowing
You welcomed me and gave me this obligation, it is reason that, with the
will to me possible, thank you for yours.
All this long harangue -that could very well be excused- said our
gentleman because the acorns they gave him brought to his memory the
golden age and it seemed to him to make that useless reasoning to the goatherds,
who, without responding to the word, spellbound and suspended,
listening. Sancho, likewise, kept quiet and ate acorns, and visited very often.
often the second zaque, who, because the wine had cooled, had him hanged
of a cork oak.
Don Quixote took longer to speak than to finish dinner; at the end of which,
one of the goatherds said:
-So that your grace may say with more truth, sir knight
errant, we entertain you with prompta and good will, we want to give you
Solace and content with making a colleague of ours sing who will not be long
much to be here; which is a very knowledgeable boy and very in love, and
who, above all, knows how to read and write and is a rabel musician, that there is no
more to be desired.
The goatherd had scarcely finished saying this, when the
They are from the rabel, and from there a little while the one who was ringing came, who was a
up to twenty-two years old, of very good grace. His companions asked him
if he had eaten, and, answering yes, the one who had made the
offers he said:
-That way, Antonio, you may well give us the pleasure of singing a little,
because this gentleman guest sees that we have who; also for the mountains and
jungles there are those who know music. We have told him your good skills, and
We want you to show them and take us out true; and so, I beg you for your
life that you sit and sing the romance of your loves that the
Your uncle benefited, who in the town has seemed very good.
"May it please me," replied the waiter.
And, without making any more begging, he sat down on the trunk of a topless
holm oak, and, tempering its rabel, from then on, with very good grace,
began to sing, saying in this way:
Antonio
-I know, Olalla, that you adore me,
since you haven't told me
not even with the eyes,
mute tongues of love affairs.
Because I know that you are known
that you love me I affirm;
that he was never unhappy
love that was known.
Well it's true that maybe
Olalla, you have given me a hint
that you have bronze in your soul
and the white chest of cliff.
Beyond between your reproaches
and very honest detours,
maybe hope shows
the edge of her dress.
Jump into the lure
my faith, which has never been able,
nor diminish by not called,
nor grow by chosen.
If love is courtesy
of which you have colix
that the end of my hopes
It must be what I imagine.
And if they are part services
to make a benign breast,
some of the ones I've done
strengthen my party.
Because if you've looked into it,
more than once you will have seen
that I have dressed on Mondays
what honored me on Sunday.
Like love and gala
they walk the same way,
at all times in your eyes
I wanted to be polite.
I stop dancing because of you
I don't even paint you music
what have you listened to after hours
and to the crowing of the cousin rooster.
I don't count the praises
that of your beauty I have said;
which, although true, do
be me from some malquisto.
Teresa del Berrocal,
praising you, he told me:
`` Tal thinks that he worships an angel,
and comes to worship a jimio;
thanks to the many charms
and the false hair,
already hypocritical beauties,
that deceive Love itself. ''
Disprove it and get angry;
her cousin returned for her:
challenge me, and you know
what I did and he did.
I don't love you a lot,
I do not pretend to you and I serve you
for the barraganía;
that my design is more good.
Coyundas has the Church
that are loops of sirgo;
put your neck in the gamella;
you will see how I put mine.
Where not, from here I swear,
for the most blessed saint,
of not leaving these mountains
but for cappuccino.
With this the goatherd ended his song; and, although Don Quixote begged him to
something else sang, Sancho Panza did not consent, because he was more to
sleep than to hear songs. And there he said to his master:
-Your grace may well accommodate, of course, where this
night, that the job that these good men have all day does not
let the nights go by singing.
"I understand you, Sancho," Don Quixote answered him; how well it shows me
that the visits of the zaque ask for more reward from sleep than from music.
"It tastes good to all of us, blessed be God," answered Sancho.
`` I do not deny it, '' replied Don Quixote, `` but make yourself comfortable where you want.
those of my profession seem better watching than sleeping. But, with everything
this, it would be good, Sancho, for you to heal this ear again,
hurting more than it needs to.
Sancho did what he was told; and, seeing one of the goatherds the wound,
told him not to be sorry, that he would remedy that easily
heal. And, taking some rosemary leaves, of much that was there,
He chewed them and mixed them with a little salt, and, applying them to his ear,
he bandaged her very well, assuring her that there was no need for another medicine; and so
it was the truth.
Chapter XII. Of what a goatherd told those who were with Don Quixote
While at this, another waiter arrived from those who brought them from the village the
bastimento, and said:
-Do you know what happens in the place, companions?
-How can we know? one of them answered.
`` Well, you know, '' continued the waiter, `` that that famous shepherd died this morning.
student named Grisostomo, and it is whispered that he has died of
that devilish wench of Marcela, the daughter of William the rich, that
who walks in the habit of a shepherdess in those andurriales.
"By Marcela you will say," said one.
"That's what I mean," replied the goatherd. And it is the good thing, that he commanded in his
testament to be buried in the field, as if he were a Moor, and
foot of the rock where the source of the cork oak is; because, according to fame,
and they say he said it, that place is where he saw her the first time. AND
He also commanded other things, such that the abbots of the town say they did not
They have to comply, nor is it good for them to be carried out, because they seem gentile. TO
all of which responds that great his friend Ambrosio, the student, who
He also dressed as a shepherd with him, that everything has to be fulfilled, without
nothing, as Grisóstomo ordered, and the people walk about this
rowdy; but, to what is said, in the end what Ambrosio and all
the shepherds their friends want; and tomorrow they come to bury him with great
pomp where I have said. And I have for me that it has to be something very to see; to
At least, I will not stop going to see her, if I knew not to return to the place tomorrow.
"We will all do the same," replied the goatherds; and we will cast lots for
who will be left to guard everyone's goats.
"You say well, Pedro," said one; although it will not be necessary to use that
diligence, that I will stay for all. And don't attribute it to virtue anymore
little curiosity of mine, but because the other guy won't let me go
day this foot happened to me.
"With all that, we thank you," replied Pedro.
And Don Quixote begged Pedro to tell him how dead he was and what shepherdess
that; to which Pedro replied that what he knew was that the dead man was
a rich son, a neighbor of a place that was in those mountains, the
who had been a student for many years in Salamanca, after which
he had returned to his place, with the opinion of a very wise and widely read.
- «Mainly, they said that he knew the science of the stars, and what
pass, there in the sky, the sun and the moon; because he promptly told us
Christ of the sun and the moon. "
-Eclipse is called, friend, that not cris, the darkening those two lights
older, 'said Don Quixote.
But Pedro, not noticing childish things, continued his story saying:
- «He also knew when the abundant or styl year was to be.»
"Sterile you mean, friend," said Don Quixote.
"Sterile or stylized," replied Pedro, "everything comes out there." «And I say that with this
what he said his father and his friends did, who gave him credit, very
rich, because they did what he advised them, saying: `` Sow this
year barley, not wheat; in this you can sow chickpeas and not barley; the fact that
It comes will be of oil guilla; the next three will not catch a drop. '' »
"That science is called astrology," said Don Quixote.
`` I don't know what his name is, '' replied Pedro, `` but I know that he knew all this, and even
plus. «Finally, not many months passed, after he came from Salamanca,
when one day he remained dressed as a shepherd, with his crook and coat,
having removed the long habits that as a schoolboy he brought; and together
another his great friend, named Ambrosio, who
he had been her partner in studies. Forget me to say how
Grisóstomo, the deceased, was a great man to compose verses; so much so that he
He did the Christmas carols for the night of the Lord's Birth, and the cars
for the day of God, represented by the young men of our town, and
everyone said they were for the corporal. When the locals saw so much
improvised dressed as shepherds to the two schoolchildren, they were amazed, and
they could not guess the cause that had prompted them to do that so
strange move. Already at this time the father of our
Grisóstomo, and he was inherited in a large amount of property, so in
furniture as in roots, and in no small number of cattle, greater and less,
and in great quantity of money; of all which was left the waiter sir
desolute, and in truth that he deserved everything, that he was a very good companion and
charitable and a friend to the good, and had a face like a blessing.
Later it came to be understood that having changed his suit had not been for
anything other than walking through these unpopulated areas in pursuit of that shepherdess
Marcela that our boy named denantes, with whom he had fallen in love
poor deceased Grisóstomo. " And I want to say now, because it is good that
you know, who is this raptor; perhaps, and even without perhaps, you will not have heard
such a thing in all the days of your life, even if you live more years
what scabies.
"Decide Sarra," replied Don Quixote, not being able to suffer the exchange of the
words of the goatherd.
"Scabies lives long," replied Pedro; and if it is, sir, that you have to me
go around zahering the words at every step, we won't finish in a year.
"Excuse me, friend," said Don Quixote; that because there is so much difference
Sarra scabies I told you; but you answered very well, because he lives longer
scabies than Sarra; and continue your story, I will not replicate you any more in
any.
"" I say then, my lord of my soul, "said the goatherd," that in our village
there was a farmer even richer than Grisóstomo's father, who was
called Guillermo, and to whom God gave, in addition to the many and great
riches, a daughter, from whose childbirth her mother died, who was the most honored
woman who was in all these contours. It only seems that now I see it,
with that face that had the sun on one end and the moon on the other; and about
all, industrious and friend of the poor, so I think it must be his
soul at the moment enjoying God in the other world. Of despite the
death of such a good woman her husband Guillermo died, leaving his daughter
Marcela, young and rich, in the power of an uncle of hers, a priest and beneficiary
in our place. The girl grew up with such beauty that it reminded us
of his mother's, who had it very large; and, with all this, it was judged that
he had to pass the daughter's. And so it was, that, when he reached the age of
fourteen to fifteen years, no one looked at her that she did not bless God, how
beautiful had raised her, and most were in love and lost for her.
Her uncle guarded her with great modesty and with much confinement; but with
All this, the fame of her great beauty spread so that, thus by
she as for her many riches, not only of our people,
but of those of many leagues around, and of the best of them, was
begged, requested, and pestered his uncle would give it to him as a wife. But he, what
to the right is a good Christian, although he wanted to marry her later, as well as
the old way, he did not want to do it without his consent, without keeping an eye on the
profit and farming offered by having the farm of the girl,
delaying their marriage. And in faith that this was said in more than one group in
the people, in praise of the good priest. " What i want you to know sir
Andante, that in these short places everything is about and everything is whispered;
and have for yourself, as I have for myself, that it must have been too much
well the clergyman who forces his parishioners to say well of him,
especially in the villages.
`` This is the truth, '' said Don Quixote, `` and go on, that the story
He is very good, and you, good Pedro, tell him with very good grace.
- I do not miss the Lord's, which is the one that makes the case. «And in the rest
You will know that, although the uncle proposed to the niece and told her the qualities
of each one in particular, of the many who asked for her as a woman, begging her
that he married and chose to his liking, she never answered anything other than
that at that time she did not want to marry, and that, being such a girl, she did not
He felt skilled to be able to bear the burden of marriage. With these that gave,
apparently just excuses, the uncle stopped bothering her, and waited for
come a little older and she knows how to choose company to her liking. Because
he said, and he said very well, that parents should not give their children
been against their will. But here it is, when I do not fall, what
One day the finicky Marcela made shepherdess remains; and, without being part of his
Uncle nor all the people in town, who advised him against it, gave in to go to the field
with the other women of the place, and gave in keeping his own cattle. And so
as she went out in public and her beauty was exposed, do not
I will know how to say how many rich young men, noblemen, and peasants have
taken Grisóstomo's suit and they go asking her through those fields. One
of which, as has already been said, was our deceased, of whom they said that
he stopped loving her, and adored her. And do not think that because Marcela is
put in that freedom and life so loose and of so little or no
recollection, which is why it has indicated, not even by similarities, that it comes in
undermining their honesty and modesty; Before there is so much surveillance with
who looks out for her honor, that of all those who serve her and request her, none has
praised, nor can it truly be praised, that he has been given some small
hope to achieve your wish. That, since he does not flee or avoid the
company and conversation of pastors, and treats them courteously and
amicably, in getting to discover his intention any of them,
although it is as just and holy as that of marriage, it casts them from itself as
with a blunderbuss. And with this way of condition it does more damage on this earth
that if the pestilence entered through it; because her affability and beauty
attracts the hearts of those who treat her to serve and love her, but her
disdain and disappointment lead them to despair; and so they don't know
what to say to her, but to call her cruel and ungrateful, with other titles
similar to this one, how well the quality of their condition shows. What if
Here you may be, sir, one day, you would see these saws echo and these
valleys with the lamentations of the disillusioned who follow her. Not very
far from here a place where there are almost two dozen tall beech trees, and there
none that in its smooth bark does not have engraved and written the name of
Marcela; and on top of some, a crown engraved on the very tree, as if
more clearly her lover would say that Marcela carries her and deserves her all the
human beauty. Here one shepherd breathes, there another complains; there I know
they hear loving songs, here desperate dirges. Which one happens all
the hours of the night sitting at the foot of some oak or rock, and there,
without folding the teary eyes, soaked and transported in their
thoughts, the sun found him in the morning; and what is there that, without giving up or
truce to his sighs, in the midst of the heat of the most annoying nap of the
Summer, lying on the burning sand, sends his complaints to the pious sky.
And give and of that, and of those and of these, freely and casually
the beautiful Marcela triumphs; and all of us who know her are waiting
where does his haughtiness stop and who has to be the happy one who is to come
to tame such a terrible condition and enjoy such shocked beauty. " By
be everything that I have told so ascertained truth, I give myself to understand that
so is the one our boy said was said about the cause of the
death of Grisóstomo. And so, I advise you, sir, that you do not stop meeting
tomorrow at his funeral, which will be very interesting, because Grisóstomo has many
friends, and it is not from this place to the one where he sends half a league to be buried.
`` I am very careful, '' said Don Quixote, `` and I thank you for the pleasure you gave me.
you have found the narration of such a tasty tale.
-Oh! replied the goatherd, `` I still don't know half of the cases that happened to
Marcela's lovers, but it could be that tomorrow we will run into each other on the road
some pastor to tell us. And, for now, it may well be that you are going to
sleep under the roof, because the night watchman could damage your wound,
since the medicine that has been given you is such that there is no need to fear
contrary accident.
Sancho Panza, who already gave the devil so much talk about the goatherd, requested,
for his part, that his master went to sleep in Pedro's hut. Did it
thus, and all the most of the night passed in memories of his mistress
Dulcinea, in imitation of Marcela's lovers. Sancho Panza settled down
between Rocinante and his donkey, and slept, not as a disadvantaged lover,
but as a man beaten to the ground.
Chapter XIII. Where the story of the shepherdess Marcela ends, with others
events
But, as soon as the day began to be discovered by the balconies of the east,
when the five of the six goatherds got up and went to wake up
Don Quixote, I already decided if he was still planning to go see the
Grisostomo's famous burial, and that they would keep him company. Don Quixote,
What else he did not want, he got up and ordered Sancho to saddle up and
saddled on the spot, which he did very diligently, and with
Then they all set out. And they had not walked a quarter of
league, when, when crossing a path, they saw up to six
shepherds, dressed in black coats and their heads crowned with
garlands of cypress and bitter oleander. Each carried a thick cane of
holly in hand. They also came with them, two gentle men of a
horse, very well dressed on the way, with three other foot grooms who
they accompanied them. On getting to meet, they greeted each other politely, and,
Asking each other where they were going, they knew that everyone was
they were heading to the burial place; and so they all began to walk
together.
One of those on horseback, speaking with his companion, said:
-It seems to me, Mr. Vivaldo, that we have to take the delay as well used
What will we do to see this famous burial, which cannot fail to be
famous, according to these shepherds they have told us strange
Shepherd as the murderous shepherdess.
"So it seems to me," Vivaldo replied; and I do not say I do delay
one day, but four days I did it in exchange for seeing him.
Don Quixote asked them what they had heard about Marcela and
Grisostomo. The walker said that that morning they had met with
those shepherds, and that, having seen them in that sad suit, they
they had asked the occasion why they were going that way; that one of them
she told him about it, recounting the strangeness and beauty of a shepherdess named
Marcela, and the loves of many who laid her down, with the death of that
Grisóstomo to whose funeral they were going. Finally, he told everything that Peter to
Don Quixote had counted.
This talk stopped and another began, asking the one called Vivaldo to
Don Quixote, what was the occasion that moved him to walk armed with that
so peaceful overland way. To which Don Quixote replied:
-The profession of my practice does not consent or allow me to walk from another
way. The good step, the gift and the rest, there was invented for the
soft courtiers; but the work, the restlessness and the weapons only
they invented and made for those the world calls knights errant,
of which I, though unworthy, am the least of all.
They hardly heard this from him, when everyone thought him mad; and by
find out more and see what kind of insanity his was, he returned to
Ask Vivaldo what did he mean by "knights errant".
"Have not your mercies read," answered Don Quixote, "the annals and
stories of England, where the famous exploits of the king are treated
Arturo, who continuously in our Castilian romance we call the king
Artús, whose ancient and common tradition throughout that kingdom of the Great
Britain that this king did not die, but, by art of enchantment, was
turned into a raven, and that, as the times go, he will reign again
collect his kingdom and scepter; for whose cause it will not be proved that from that time
to this there is any English dead raven? Well, in time of this good
king was instituted that famous chivalric order of the knights of
the Round Table, and passed, without missing a point, the loves that were there
They tell of Don Lanzarote del Lago with Queen Geneva, being a mediator
of them and knowing that so honored owner Quintañona, where she was born
that so well-known romance, and so decanted in our Spain, of:
I was never a gentleman
ladies so well served
as it was Lanzarote
when he came from Brittany;
with that so sweet and so smooth progress of their loving and strong dates.
For since then, from hand to hand, it was that order of chivalry
spreading and expanding throughout many and diverse parts of the world; and in
she was famous and known for her dates the brave Amadís de Gaula,
with all his children and grandchildren, up to the fifth generation, and the courageous
Felixmarte of Hircania, and he should never be praised as Tirante el Blanco,
and almost that in our days we saw and communicated and heard the invincible and
brave knight Don Belianís of Greece. This, then, gentlemen, is to be
knight errant, and what I have said is the order of his knighthood; on the
which, as I have once said, I, though a sinner, have made profession, and
The same as the gentlemen referred to, I profess. And so I go by
these lonely and unpopulated looking for adventure, with deliberate spirit
to offer my arm and my person to the most dangerous than luck
I will provide, to the aid of the weak and needy.
For these reasons that he said, the walkers had just found out that he was
Don Quixote lacking in judgment, and of the kind of madness that ruled him, of what
which received the same admiration received by all those who
again they came to her knowledge. And Vivaldo, who was a very discreet person
and of happy condition, to pass without regret the little way that they said
that they lacked, when they reached the burial mountain range, he wanted to give
that happened later with his nonsense. And so he said:
`` It seems to me, sir knight errant, that your grace has professed one of
the narrowest professions on earth, and I have for myself that even
that of the Carthusian friars is not so narrow.
`` It could well be so narrow, '' answered our Don Quixote, `` but so
necessary in the world I am not within two fingers of questioning it. Because if
going to tell the truth, the soldier who executes what his
captain orders him to be the same captain who orders it. I want to say that
The religious, with all peace and tranquility, ask heaven for the good of the
Earth; but the soldiers and knights put into execution what they
they ask, defending it with the courage of our arms and edges of our
swords; not below deck, but to the open sky, put on target
of the insufferable rays of the sun in summer and the bristling yelos of the
winter. So, we are God's ministers on earth, and arms by whom
his justice is executed in her. And, like the things of the war and the
they concerning and concerning cannot be put into execution but
sweating, toiling and working, let those who profess it
have, no doubt, more work than those who in quiet peace and repose
They are begging God to favor those who can do little. I don't want to say
Nor does it happen to me that the knight errant is such a good state
like that of the religious prisoner; I just want to infer, so I
I suffer, which, without a doubt, is more toil and more battered, and more hungry
and thirsty, miserable, broken and lousy; because there is no doubt but that
Knights-errant past suffered much misfortune in the speech of their
life. And if some rose to be emperors by the value of their arm, to
faith that it cost them a good reason for their blood and sweat; so what if to those who
to such a degree they went up they lacked charming and wise men to help them,
that they were well deceived of their wishes and well deceived of their
hopes.
"I am of that opinion," replied the traveler; but one thing, among others
many, I find it very bad about knights errant, and it is that, when they
come on the occasion of undertaking a great and dangerous adventure, in which
manifest danger of losing his life, never in that instant of attack
remember to entrust themselves to God, as every Christian is obliged to
to do in similar dangers; before, they entrust themselves to their ladies, with so much
wins and devotion as if they were his God: which I think smells
something to kindness.
Sir, replied Don Quixote, that cannot be less in any way, and
the knight-errant would fall into a bad case if he did otherwise; it's ready
in use and custom in knight-errant that the knight-errant
that, when undertaking some great date of arms, his mistress had
in front of you, turn your eyes to her softly and lovingly, as if asking
they favor and protect you in the doubtful trance that you undertake; and even if nobody
hears him, he is obliged to say a few words under his breath, in which
every heart is entrusted to him; and of this we have innumerable examples in
stories. And it should not be understood by this that they have to stop entrusting
bye Bye; what time and place are left to do it in the speech of the
construction site.
`` With all that, '' replied the walker, `` I still have a scruple, and it is that
I have read many times that words are trapped between two errant knights,
and, from one to another, their anger flares up, and their
horses and take a good piece of the field, and then, without further ado, to all
as they run, they meet again; and, in the middle of the run, he
they entrust their ladies; and what usually happens of the meeting is that the one
falls by the haunches of the horse, passed with the spear of the opponent from side to side
part, and it also comes to the other that, not having his manes,
I couldn't stop coming to the ground. And I don't know how the death took place
to entrust himself to God in the discourse of this fast-paced work. Better
it was that the words that in the race he spent entrusting to his lady the
spend what he owed and was obligated to as a Christian. The more that
I have for me that not all errant knights have ladies to whom
entrust themselves, because not everyone is in love.
`` That cannot be, '' answered Don Quixote, `` I say that there cannot be
errant knight without a lady, because it is so proper and so natural to
such to be in love as to the sky to have stars, and surely not
history has been seen where there is a knight errant without love; and by
the same case that it was without them, it would not be considered legitimate
knight, but by bastard, and who entered the stronghold of the cavalry
bliss, not by the gate, but by the fences, as a robber and a thief.
`` With all that, '' said the traveler, `` it seems to me, if I remember correctly,
read that Don Galaor, brother of the courageous Amadís de Gaula, never had a
designated to whom it could be entrusted; and, with all this, he was not taken into
less, and he was a very brave and famous knight.
To which our Don Quixote replied:
-Sir, a single swallow does not make a summer. The more, that I know that of
secret was that gentleman very well in love; out that, that of
wanting all of them well how much they seemed good to him was a natural condition, to whom
could not go to hand. But, in resolution, found out it is very well that he
he had only one whom he had made mistress of his will, to whom he
He commended very often and very secretly, because he was secretly
gentleman.
-Then, if it is essential that every knight-errant has to be in love
-said the walker-, it may well be believed that your grace is, for it is
of the profession. And if your grace does not pride itself on being so secret
as Don Galaor, with the truth that I can, I beg you, on behalf of all this
company and in mine, tell us the name, country, quality and beauty of your
Lady; that she would be happy that everyone knows that she is
dear and served by such a gentleman as your grace seems.
Here Don Quixote gave a great sigh, and said:
-I will not be able to affirm if the sweet my enemy likes, or not, that the world
know that I serve you; I only know how to say, responding to what with so much
Restraint is asked of me, that her name is Dulcinea; his homeland, Toboso,
a place in La Mancha; her quality, at least, must be that of a princess,
for she is my queen and mistress; her beauty, superhuman, because in her is
come to make true all the impossible and chimerical attributes of
beauty that poets give to their ladies: that their hair is gold, their forehead
fields elysees, her eyebrows arched from the sky, her eyes suns, her cheeks
roses, her coral lips, pearls her teeth, alabaster her neck, marble
his chest, ivory his hands, his white snow, and the parts that are visible
human concealed honesty are such, as I think and understand, that
only discreet consideration can make them more expensive, and not compare them.
"We would like to know the lineage, prosapia and lineage," Vivaldo replied.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-It is not of the ancient Roman Curcians, Gaius and Cipiones, nor of the
modern Colonas and Ursinos; neither of the Moncadas and Requesenes of Catalonia, nor
less than the Rebellas and Villanovas of Valencia; Palafoxes, Nuzas,
Rocabertis, Corellas, Lunas, Alagones, Urreas, Foces and Gurreas de Aragón;
Cerdas, Manriques, Mendozas and Guzmanes de Castilla; Alencastros, Pallas and
Meneses de Portogal; but it is from those of Toboso de la Mancha, lineage, although
modern, such that it can give a generous beginning to the most illustrious families
of the centuries to come. And do not reply to me in this, if it were not with the
conditions that Cervino put at the foot of the Orlando arms trophy, which
He said:
nobody move them
that being can not with Roldán on trial.
-Although mine is from the Cachopines of Laredo -answered the walker-, no
I will dare to put him with that of Toboso de la Mancha, since, to say
True, such a surname has not reached my ears so far.
- How that will not have arrived! Don Quixote replied.
With great attention all the others were listening to the conversation of the two, and
even the same goatherds and shepherds knew the too much lack of
judgment of our don Quixote. Only Sancho Panza thought that how much his master
said it was true, knowing who he was and having known him since his
birth; and what I doubted something was to believe that of the beautiful
Dulcinea del Toboso, because never such a name or such a princess had come
never to his news, although he lived so close to El Toboso.
In these talks they went, when they saw that, due to the bankruptcy that two high
mountains made, up to twenty shepherds went down, all with black coats
wool dressed and crowned with garlands, which, to what later seemed,
they were which of yew and which of cypress. Among six of them they brought a litter,
covered with a great diversity of flowers and bouquets. Which seen by one
of the goatherds, he said:
-Those who come there are the ones who bring Grisóstomo's body, and the
The foot of that mountain is the place where he ordered to be buried.
For this reason they hurried to arrive, and it was in time that those who came
they had put the litter on the ground; and four of them with sharp peaks
they were digging the grave on the side of a hard rock.
The one and the other were received courteously; and then Don Quixote and the
who came with him began to look at the litters, and in them they saw covered
of flowers a dead body, dressed as a shepherd, aged, apparently, of
thirty years; and, although dead, he showed that he had been alive with his face
beautiful and of a gallant disposition. Around him he had in the same
you have some books and many papers, open and closed. And so those who
This they looked at, like those who opened the grave, and all the others who there
there was, they kept a wonderful silence, until one of those who
dead Truieron said to another:
-Look, Ambrosio, if this is the place Grisóstomo said, since
do you want that as punctually what he left ordered in his
will.
"This is it," Ambrosio answered; that many times in it my
unfortunate friend the story of your misfortune. There he told me that he saw the
first time to that mortal enemy of the human lineage, and there it was also
where the first time he declared his thought, as honest as in love,
and that was the last time where Marcela ended up disillusioning and disdaining him,
so that he ended the tragedy of his miserable life. And whom
memory of so many misfortunes, he wanted to be deposited in his entrails
of eternal oblivion.
And, turning to Don Quixote and the walkers, he continued saying:
-That body, gentlemen, that with pious eyes you are looking at, was depositary
of a soul in whom heaven put an infinite part of its riches. That's him
Grisóstomo's body, who was unique in wit, only in courtesy,
extreme in gentleness, phoenix in friendship, magnificent without price, grave without
conceit, cheerful without baseness, and, finally, first in all that it is to be
well, and without a second in all that it was to be unhappy. Wanted well, it was
abhorred; he worshiped, he was scorned; he begged a beast, he bothered a marble,
ran after the wind, cried out to loneliness, served ingratitude,
who achieved as a prize to be the spoils of death in the middle of the
career of his life, which was ended by a shepherdess whom he sought
eternalize so that it lived in the memory of the people, who could
show well those papers that you are looking at, if he had not sent me
that he delivered them to the fire in having delivered his body to the earth.
"You will use them more rigorously and cruelly," said Vivaldo, "than their
same owner, since it is not fair or correct that the will of
who what he orders goes out of all reasonable speech. And I did not have him
Well, Augusto Caesar, if he consented to put into execution what the
divine Mantuano left in his sent will. I hope that, Mr. Ambrosio,
that you give the body of your friend to the earth, do not want to give
written to oblivion; that if he ordered as aggrieved, it is not good that you
you comply as indiscreet. Before doing, giving life to these papers, that
Marcela's cruelty always has it, to serve as an example, in the
times to come, to the living, to turn away and flee
to fall into such cliffs; that I already know, and those of us who come here,
the story of your loving and desperate friend, and we know the
your friendship, and the occasion of his death, and what he left commanded at the end
of the life; from which unfortunate history can be drawn how much has been
Marcela's cruelty, Grisóstomo's love, the faith of your friendship,
with the whereabouts of those who run freely down the path that
the wild love before their eyes puts them. Last night we knew death
of Grisóstomo, and that in this place he was to be buried; and so on
curiosity and pity, we left our right trip, and we agreed to
come to see with our eyes what had hurt us so much in oil. And in
I pay this pity and the desire that was born in us from remedialla if
we could, we beg you, oh discreet Ambrosio! (at least, I will
I beg on my part), that, ceasing to burn these papers, let me
bring some of them.
And, without waiting for the pastor to respond, he reached out and took some of the
those who were closest; seeing which Ambrosio said:
"As a courtesy, I will allow you to stay, sir, with those who have already
taken; but to think that I will stop burning those that remain is thought
vain.
Vivaldo, who wanted to see what the papers said, then opened the one
dellos and saw that it was entitled: Desperate Song. Oyolo Ambrosio and
said:
- That is the last paper that the unfortunate wrote; and, because you see, sir,
in the term that his misadventures had him, read it so that you are heard;
How good it will be for you who takes time to open the grave.
"I will do that very willingly," said Vivaldo.
And, as all those around had the same desire, they put themselves to the
round; and he, reading in a clear voice, saw that it said thus:
Chapter XIV. Where the desperate verses of the late shepherd are put,
with other unexpected events
Song of Grisóstomo
Since you want, cruel, to be published,
from language to language and from one to another,
strength of your harsh rigor,
I'll make hell communicate
to my sad chest a suffering son,
with which the common use of my voice twists.
And along with my desire, which strives
to tell my pain and your deeds,
the accent will go from the frightening voice,
and mixed in it, by greater torment,
pieces of the wretched entrails.
So listen and listen carefully,
not to the concerted son, but to the rüido
that from the depths of my bitter chest,
driven by a forced delirium,
for my pleasure it comes out and your spite.
The roar of the lion, of the fierce wolf
the fearful howl, the horrendous whistle
scaly serpent, the frightful
ballad of some monster, the doom
squawk of the crow, and the roar
of the contrasted wind in unstable sea;
of the already defeated bull the implacable
bellow, and the widow turtle
the heartfelt coo; the sad song
of the envied owl, with the cry
of all the infernal black gang,
go out with the suffering soul outside,
mixed in one son, in such a way
may the senses all be confused,
for the cruel pain that is found in me
for battle he asks for new modes.
From so much confusion not the sands
they will hear the sad echoes of Father Tagus,
nor the famous Betis las olivas:
that there my hard sorrows will be scattered
on high cliffs and deep hollows,
with a dead tongue and with living words;
or already in narrow valleys, or in elusive
beaches, naked of human contract,
or where the sun never showed its light,
or among the poisonous crowd
of beasts that the plain Libyan feeds;
that, since in the desert moors
the hoarse echoes of my evil, uncertain,
sound with your rigor so without a second,
for the privilege of my short fates,
they will be carried across the wide world.
Kill a disdain, frighten patience,
or true or false, a suspicion;
they kill jealousy with stronger rigor;
life long absence bewilders;
against a fear of forgetfulness does not profit
firm hope of happy luck.
In everything there is certain, inevitable death;
but me, miracle never seen !, I live
jealous, absent, scorned and true
of the suspicions that have me dead;
and in the oblivion in whom my fire fanned,
and, among so many torments, it never reaches
my sight to see hope in the shadow,
Neither I, desperate, seek it;
before, for shuddering in my complaint,
be without her forever I swear.
Can it, by chance, in an instant
wait and fear, or else do it,
being the causes of fear more certain?
Do I have, if the hard zeal is before,
to close these eyes, if I have hair
for a thousand open wounds in the soul?
Who won't open wide the doors
to mistrust, when you look
discovered disdain, and suspicions,
Oh bitter conversion, truths made,
and the clean truth turned into a lie?
Oh, in the kingdom of love fierce tyrants
jealousy, put an iron in these hands!
Give me, scorn, a twisted rope.
But, alas! That, with cruel victory,
your memory suffocates suffering.
I die, anyway; and, why never wait
good success in death or in life,
I will be stubborn in my fantasy.
I will say that the one who wants well is successful,
and that the most surrendered soul is freer
to that of ancient love tyranny.
I will say that the enemy always mine
the soul is beautiful as the body has,
and that his forgetfulness of my guilt is born,
and that, in faith of the evils that he does us,
love his empire in just peace maintains.
And, with this opinion and a hard bond,
speeding up the miserable term
to which their disdain has led me,
I will offer body and soul to the winds,
no laurel or palm of future assets.
You, who with so many unreason shows
the reason that forces me to do it
to the weary life that I hate,
Well, you see that it gives you notorious samples
this deep wound of the heart,
of how, happy, to your rigor I offer myself,
Yes, by the way, you know that I deserve
that the clear sky of your beautiful eyes
in my death be troubled, do not do it;
that I do not want you to satisfy anything,
by giving you the spoils of my soul.
Before, with laughter on the fatal occasion,
discover that my end was your party;
but great simplicity is to let you know about this,
Well I know your glory is known
in which my life comes to an end so quickly.
Come, it is time now, from the deep abyss
Tantalize it with your thirst; Sisyphus come
with the terrible weight of his song;
Titus bring his vulture, and anxiety
with his wheel Egïón does not stop,
nor the sisters who work so hard;
and all together their mortal breakdown
move on my chest, and in a low voice
-if they are already due to a desperate-
sing sad, sorrowful gifts,
to the body to whom even the shroud is denied.
And the infernal gatekeeper of the three faces,
with a thousand other chimeras and a thousand monsters,
carry the painful counterpoint;
that another better pomp does not seem to me
that a deceased lover deserves it.
Desperate song, don't complain
when you leave my sad company;
before, because the cause you were born
with my misfortune he increases his fortune,
even in the grave do not be sad.
It seemed good to those who had listened to Grisóstomo's song,
since the one who read it said that it did not seem to him that it conformed with the
relationship that he had heard of Marcela's modesty and kindness, because in her
Grisóstomo complained of jealousy, suspicion and absence, all to the detriment
Marcela's good credit and good reputation. To which Ambrosio replied,
like the one who knew well the most hidden thoughts of his friend:
-So that, sir, you undoubtedly satisfy yourselves, it is well that you know that when
this unfortunate man wrote this song was absent from Marcela, from whom
he had been absent of his own free will, to see if she would use the absence with him
of their ordinary fueros. And, like the absent lover, there is nothing that is not
fatigue him or fear that he will not reach him, that's how Grisóstomo was tired
imagined jealousy and feared suspicions as if they were true. And with
this remains the truth that fame proclaims the goodness of
Marcela; which, apart from being cruel, and a little arrogant and a lot
disdainful, the same envy neither should nor can fault it.
"That's the truth," Vivaldo answered.
And, wanting to read another paper from the ones he had reserved from the fire, he
obstructed a marvelous vision - which she seemed so - that unexpectedly
offered them to their eyes; and it was that, on top of the rock where the
grave, seemed the shepherdess Marcela, so beautiful that her fame
loveliness. Those who had not seen her until then looked at her with
admiration and silence, and those who were already used to seeing it did not
they were less suspended than those who had never seen it. But just the
Ambrosio had seen, when, with displays of indignant spirit, he said to him:
- Are you coming to see, by any chance, oh fierce basilisk these mountains!
your presence shed blood the wounds of this wretched one to whom your cruelty
took his life? Or do you come to brag about the cruel exploits of your condition,
or to see from that height, like another ruthless Nero, the fire of his
burned Rome, or to step on, arrogantly, this wretched corpse, like the
ungrateful daughter to that of her father Tarquino? Tell us quickly what are you coming, or what
It is what you like the most; that, because I know that the thoughts of
Grisóstomo never stopped obeying you in life, I will make that, even he died,
obey those of all those who called themselves your friends.
"I am not coming, oh Ambrosio! To anything you have said," he answered.
Marcela-, but to go back on my own, and to imply how out of
reason goes all those who of their sorrows and the death of Grisóstomo me
blame; And so, I beg all of you here to pay attention to me, not
it will take a lot of time or spend many words to persuade a
true to the discreet.
"Heaven made me, as you say, beautiful, and in such a way that, without
to be powerful to something else, to love me my beauty moves you; and for him
love that you show me, say, and still want, that I am obliged to love you.
I know, with the natural understanding that God has given me, that everything
beautiful is kind; but it is not enough that, by reason of being loved, is
what is loved because of its beauty is bound to love those who love it. And more, that
It could happen that the lover of the beautiful was ugly, and, the ugly being
worthy of being hated, it is very wrong to say '' Love you for being beautiful; make me
to love even if it's ugly. '' But, in case the
beauties, not for that reason desires should run the same, that not all
beauties fall in love; that some cheer the view and do not give up the will;
that if all the beauties fell in love and surrendered, it would be a walk
confused and misguided wills, without knowing in which they would stop;
because, being infinite the beautiful subjects, infinite had to be the
wishes. And, as I have heard, true love is not divided, and must
be voluntary, and not forced. This being so, as I think it is, why
what do you want me to surrender my will by force, forced no more than what you say
that you love me well? If not, tell me: if as the sky made me beautiful I
made ugly, would it be fair for me to complain about you because you don't love me?
How much more, that you have to consider that I did not choose the beauty that
I have; that, as it is, heaven gave it to me freely, without me asking or
choose it. And, just as the viper does not deserve to be blamed for the poison that
has, since with it he kills, for having given it nature, neither do I
I deserve to be reprimanded for being beautiful; that beauty in women
Honest is like the separated fire or like the sharp sword, which not even he burns
nor does she cut those who do not approach them. Honor and virtues are
adornments of the soul, without which the body, even if it is, should not
look beautiful. Well, if honesty is one of the virtues that the body
and they adorn and beautify the soul more, why should the one who is loved lose it
for being beautiful, for corresponding to the intention of the one who, for his
Will you, with all your strength and industries try to lose it?
»I was born free, and in order to live free I chose the solitude of the fields.
The trees of these mountains are my company, the clear waters of these
streams my mirrors; with the trees and with the waters I communicate my
thoughts and beauty. Fire I am turned away and sword put far away. To the
that I have fallen in love with the sight I have disappointed with the words. And if the
desires are sustained with hope, not having given any to Grisóstomo
nor to any other, the end of none of them may well be said that before
killed his stubbornness than my cruelty. And if you take me over that they were honest
thoughts, and that for this she was obliged to correspond to them, I say
that, when in that same place where his grave is now being dug, I
discovered the goodness of his intention, I told him that mine was to live in
perpetual loneliness, and that the earth alone enjoyed the fruit of my
recollection and the spoils of my beauty; and if he, with all this
disappointment, wanted to persist against hope and sail against the wind,
How much to be drowned in the middle of the gulf of their folly? If I
entertained, was false; if I pleased him, he would do against me better
intention and budget. He stubbornly disappointed, he despaired without being hated:
Now see if it will be a reason for his grief to be blamed on me! Complain
the deceived, despair the one who lacked the promised
hopes, let the one I call be trusted, the one I admit boast; but
do not call me cruel or homicidal the one whom I do not promise, cheat, call or
I admit.
»Heaven has not yet wanted me to love by destiny, and thinking
that I have to love by choice is excused. This general disappointment serves
each of those who ask me for their particular benefit; and understand,
henceforth, that if anyone dies for me, he does not die of jealousy or
unhappy, because whoever loves no one should make no one jealous; that the
disappointments are not to be taken into account of disdain. The one who calls me beast
and basilisk, leave me as a harmful and bad thing; the one who calls me ungrateful,
do not serve me; he who is unknown, does not know me; who cruel, do not follow me;
that this beast, this basilisk, is ungrateful, cruel and
unknown, nor will it seek, serve, know or follow in any
way. That if Grisóstomo was killed by his impatience and thrown desire, why
Is my honest behavior and modesty to blame? If I keep my cleanliness
with the company of the trees, why should he who
do you want me to have it with men? I, as you know, have riches
my own and I do not covet those of others; I have free condition and I do not like
hold on: I neither love nor hate anyone. I do not cheat on this one or request
that one, I neither mock with one nor am I entertained with the other. The conversation
honesty of the zagalas of these villages and the care of my goats I
entertains. These mountains have my wishes as a term, and if from here
they go out, it is to contemplate the beauty of the sky, steps with which the soul walks
to his first abode.
And, in saying this, without wanting to hear any answer, he turned his back and
he entered the most closed of a mountain that was nearby, leaving
admired, both for her discretion and her beauty, to all who
there they were. And some gave samples - of those who of the mighty
arrow of the rays of her beautiful eyes were wounded - from wanting to follow her,
without taking advantage of the manifest disappointment they had heard. Which seen
by Don Quixote, seeming to him that there it was good to use his cavalry,
helping needy maidens, putting his hand on the fist of his
sword, in loud intelligible voices, said:
-No person, of whatever state and condition, dares to
follow the beautiful Marcela, on pain of falling into my furious indignation.
She has shown with clear and sufficient reasons little or no guilt
that he has had in the death of Grisóstomo, and how alien he lives by condescending
with the wishes of none of his lovers, for whose sake it is just that, in
instead of being followed and persecuted, be honored and esteemed by all
good of the world, because it shows that in it she is the one who with so much
honest intention lives.
Either because it was because of Don Quixote's threats, or because Ambrosio told them
to conclude with what their good friend owed, none of the shepherds
He moved or moved away from there until, after the burial was finished and the
Grisóstomo papers, they put his body in it, not without many tears
of the bystanders. They closed the grave with a thick rock, while
that a slab was ending that, according to Ambrosio said, he planned to have done, with
an epitaph that was to say this way:
Lies here of a lover
the miserable frozen body,
who was a cattle herder,
lost by heartbreak.
He died at the hands of rigor
of an elusive beautiful ungrateful,
with whom his empire expands
the tyranny of his love.
Then they scattered many flowers and bouquets over the top of the grave, and, giving
all condolences to his friend Ambrosio, said goodbye to him. They did the same
Vivaldo and his companion, and Don Quixote said goodbye to their guests and the
walkers, who begged him to come with them to Seville, for being
a place so comfortable to find adventures, that in every street and after every
corner are offered more than in any other. Don Quixote thanked them for
notice and the encouragement they showed to do him mercy, and said that by then
I did not want and should not go to Seville, until I had stripped all those
saws of mischievous thieves, of whom it was famous that they were all
full. Seeing their good determination, the walkers did not want
bother him more, but, turning to say goodbye again, they left him and
They continued on their way, in which they had no shortage of what to discuss, as well as the
history of Marcela and Grisóstomo as of the follies of Don Quixote. The
which determined to go find the pastor Marcela and offer her everything
he could at her service. But it did not suit him as he thought, according to what is said
in the discourse of this true story, ending here the second part.
Third part of the ingenious hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha
Chapter XV. Where the unfortunate adventure that Don encountered is told
Quixote in running into some soulless Yangües
The wise man Cide Hamete Benengeli tells that, just as Don Quixote said goodbye
of his guests and of all those who were found at the shepherd's burial
Grisóstomo, he and his squire entered the very forest where they saw
that the pastor Marcela had entered; and, having walked more than two
hours for him, looking for her everywhere without being able to find her, they came to
stop at a meadow full of fresh grass, alongside which ran a stream
peaceful and cool; so much so that he invited and forced the hours of the
siesta, which rigorously was already beginning to enter.
Don Quixote and Sancho got out, and, leaving the donkey and Rocinante to their
breadths to graze from the much grass that was there, they gave sack to the
saddlebags, and, without any ceremony, in good peace and company, master and groom
they ate what they found in them.
Sancho had not been cured of letting Rocinante loose, sure that he
He knew that all the mares of the pasture
of Córdoba did not make him take sinister evil. So he ordered luck, and
the devil, who doesn't sleep every time, who walked through that valley grazing
a herd of Galician hacas of some Galician muleteers, of which it is
custom napping with his pack in places and places of grass and water; and that
Where Don Quixote happened to be was very much in regard to the Galicians.
It happened, then, that Rocinante had a desire to revel in the
ladies facas; and leaving, just as he smelled them, his natural step and
habit, without asking his owner for a license, he took a little mincemeat trotico
and he went to communicate his need with them. But they, what, what
It seemed, they must have been more willing to graze than they did, they received him with
horseshoes and teeth, in such a way that, in a short space, he
they broke the straps and he was left, without a chair, in a ball. But what he owed
more to feel was that, seeing the muleteers the force that their mares
he did to them, they came with stakes, and they gave him so many sticks that
they threw badly on the ground.
Already in this Don Quixote and Sancho, who had seen the beating of Rocinante,
they came gasping; and Don Quixote said to Sancho:
-As far as I can see, friend Sancho, these are not gentlemen, but rude and
low-profile. Say it because well you can help me to take due
revenge for the injury that has been done to us before our eyes
Rocinante.
"What the hell of revenge should we take," answered Sancho, "if these are
more than twenty and we not more than two, and even, perhaps, we but one and
half?
"I am worth a cent," replied Don Quixote.
And, without making further speeches, he reached for his sword and lashed out at the
Galicians, and Sancho Panza did the same, prompted and moved by the example of his
love. And, at the first time, Don Quixote stabbed one of them, which opened
a leather tunic in which he was dressed, with a large part of the back.
The Galicians, who saw themselves mistreating those two men alone, being
they so many, they went to their stakes, and, taking the two in the middle,
they began to talk about them with great eagerness and vehemence. Truth is
that at the second touch they found Sancho on the ground, and the same thing happened to
Don Quixote, without his skill and good spirit being worth him; and wanted his
luckily he came to fall at the feet of Rocinante, who had not yet
gotten up; where you can see the fury with which they pound stakes
in rustic and angry hands.
Seeing, then, the Galicians the bad errand they had done, with the greatest
as quickly as they could, they loaded their pack and continued on their way, leaving
the two adventurers of bad character and of worse disposition.
The first to suffer was Sancho Panza; and, being next to his
Sir, in a sick and hurt voice, he said:
"Mr. Don Quixote!" Ah, Mr. Don Quixote!
-What do you want, Sancho brother? Don Quixote answered with the same tone
effeminate and suffering than Sancho.
`` I would like, if it were possible, '' answered Sancho Panza, `` that your grace
take two drinks of that ugly Blas drink, if your own has it
mercy there by hand. Perhaps it will be of benefit to the breaches of
bones as it is for the holidays.
-Well, to have her here, unfortunate me, what were we missing? -replied don
Quixote-. But I swear to you, Sancho Panza, by faith as a knight errant, that
before two days pass, if fortune does not order otherwise, I have it from
have in my power, or badly my hands must walk.
-Well, in how many do you think we can move our feet?
Sancho Panza replied.
`` I know how to say about myself, '' said the grinding knight Don Quixote, `` that I won't know how to put
end to those days. But I am to blame for everything, that there was no
put hand to the sword against men who were not armed knights like
me; and thus, I believe that, in pain of having passed the laws of chivalry, he has
allowed the god of battles to give me this punishment. For the
which one, Sancho Panza, you should be warned about this that I will now tell you,
because it matters a lot to the health of both; and it is that, when you see that
Such a scoundrel does us some wrong, do not wait for me to put my hand
to the sword for them, because I will not do it in any way, but put your hand
to your sword and punish them according to your taste; yes in your help and defense
Gentlemen come, I will know how to defend you and offend them with all my power;
that you have already seen by a thousand signs and experiences to where it goes
the value of this my strong arm.
The poor lord was so arrogant with the defeat of the brave
Biscayan. But it did not seem so good to Sancho Panza the notice of his master that
stop responding, saying:
-Lord, I am a peaceful, meek, calm man, and I know how to dissimulate anyone
insult, because I have a wife and children to support and raise. So, be it to
Your grace also warn, because it cannot be a mandate, that in no
I will put my hand to the sword, neither against villain nor against knight; and
that, from here to before God, I forgive all the wrongs that have been done to me
and they have to do: now I have done them, or do or have to do, tall person
or low, rich or poor, hidalgo or pechero, without accepting status or condition
some.
Which, heard by his master, replied:
-I would like to have breath to be able to speak a little rested, and that the
pain that I have in this rib will appease as much as, to give you
understand, Panza, in the error in which you are. Come here, sinner; if the wind
of fortune, so far so contrary, in our favor it turns,
taking us the candles of desire so that surely and without any contrast
Let's take port in one of the islands that I have promised you, what would it be
of you if, winning it, would I make you mister della? Well will you come to
make it impossible for not being a gentleman, or wanting to be, or having value or
intention to avenge your injuries and defend your lordship? Because you have to know
that in the newly conquered kingdoms and provinces are never so
still the spirits of his natives, nor so much on the part of the new lord that
they are afraid that they have to do something new to alter again
things, and return, as they say, to try their luck; and thus, it is necessary that
the new possessor has understanding to know how to govern himself, and courage to
offend and defend yourself in any event.
-In this one that has now happened to us -answered Sancho-, I would like to have
that understanding and that value that your grace says; but I swear, by faith
of poor man, that I am more for bizmas than for talks. Look at your
Thank you if you can get up, and we will help Rocinante, although he does not deserve it,
because he was the main cause of all this grinding. I never thought of
Rocinante, who considered him a chaste person and as peaceful as me. Anyway,
Well they say that it takes a long time to come to know the people,
and that there is no sure thing in this life. Who would say that after those
as great slashes as your mercy gave to that unfortunate
knight errant, had to come, by the post and in pursuit of him, this
so great a storm of sticks that it has unloaded on our backs?
`` Even yours, Sancho, '' replied Don Quixote, `` must be made to order.
similar cloudy; but mine, raised between synabafas and holland,
Of course, they will feel the pain of this misfortune more. And if it wasn't because
I imagine ..., what do I say I imagine? I know very true, that all these
discomforts are very attached to the exercise of arms, here I would leave
die of pure anger.
To this the squire replied:
-Sir, since these misfortunes are of the harvest of chivalry, tell me
your mercy if they happen very often, or if they have limited times
in which they occur; because it seems to me that two harvests will remain
useless for the third, if God, by his infinite mercy, does not
help.
`` Know, friend Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that the lives of the
knights errant is subject to a thousand dangers and misadventures; and, neither more nor
less, it is potentially propitious of being the knights errant kings and
emperors, as experience has shown in many and diverse
gentlemen, of whose stories I have full news. And you could count
Now, if the pain gave me place, of some who, only for the value of their
arm, they have risen to the high degrees that I have counted; and these same ones
they saw before and after in various calamities and miseries. Because the
brave Amadís de Gaula found himself in the power of his mortal enemy
charming, of whom it is assumed that he gave him, having him
prisoner, more than two hundred lashes with the reins of his horse, tied to a
coluna of a patio. And there is still a secret author, and of no little credibility, who
says that, having caught the Knight of Phoebus with a certain trap that
sank under his feet, in a certain castle, and when he fell, he found
in a deep chasm under the ground, bound hand and foot, and there he
they threw a destas that they call melecinas, of snow water and sand, of what
that came very to the end; and if he were not helped in that great trouble of a
wise great friend of his, the poor gentleman will have a very bad time. I crave that,
I may as well pass among so many good people; what greater insults are the
that these have passed, not the ones that we now have. Because I want
make you aware, Sancho, that they do not afflict the wounds that occur with
instruments that perhaps are in the hands; and this is in the law of
mourning, written by express words: that if the shoemaker gives another with the
last that he has in his hand, since it is truly made of wood, not by
It will be said that the one who found it is beaten. I say this because
do not think that, since we were crushed on this pendency, we were
affronted; because the weapons that those men brought, with which we
crushed, they were none other than their stakes, and none of them, to which I was
remember, he had rapier, sword or dagger.
"They didn't give me a place," answered Sancho, "to watch while; because,
I barely touched my tizona when they crossed my shoulders with their
pine trees, so that they took the sight of my eyes and the force of the
feet, giving me where I now lie, and where I do not feel sorry for
to think if the hitting was an affront or not, as the pain of
the blows, which must remain as imprinted in my memory as in the
backs.
`` With all that, I let you know, Brother Panza, '' replied Don Quixote, `` that
there is memory to whom time does not end, nor pain that death does not consume.
"Well, what greater misfortune can she be," replied Panza, "than the one who awaits
at the time that it consumes it and death that ends it? If it's ours
misfortune outside of those that with a couple of bizmas are cured, even not so
bad; but I am seeing that not all the plasters of a
hospital to even bring them to fruition.
"Let go of yourself and draw strength from weakness, Sancho," answered Don Quixote.
I'll do so, and let's see how Rocinante is doing; that, it seems to me, no
the poor man has had the least share of this misfortune.
`` There is nothing to wonder about, '' answered Sancho, `` he being so good.
errant knight; What I marvel at is that my donkey has
left free and without coasts where we left without ribs.
- Chance always leaves an open door in misfortunes, to give
remedy for them, 'said Don Quixote. Say it because that beast may
now supply the lack of Rocinante, taking me from here to some
castle where I am cured of my holidays. And more, that I will not have to disgrace
such chivalry, because I remember having read that that good old man
Silenus, tutor and pedagogue of the merry god of laughter, when he entered the
city ​​of a hundred gates went, much to his pleasure, knight on a very
beautiful ass.
-It will be true that he should go gentleman, as your grace says
answered Sancho, but there is a great difference from going gentleman to going
crossed like a sack of garbage.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-The feridas that are received in the battles, before they give honor that they remove it.
So, Belly friend, do not reply to me anymore, but, as I have already told you,
Get up the best you can and put me in the way that I will like the most
on top of your donkey, and let's get out of here before the night comes and skips us
in this depopulated.
"Well, I have heard your worship say," said Panza, "that it is very
knights errant sleeping in the moors and deserts most of the year, and
that they have it very lucky.
"That is," said Don Quixote, "when they can't take it anymore, or when they're in love;"
and this is so true, that there has been a gentleman who has been on a
rock, in the sun and in the shade, and in the inclemencies of the sky, two years, without
let her mistress know. And one of these was Amadís, when, calling himself
Beltenebros, stayed at the Peña Pobre, I don't know if eight years or eight months,
that I am not very good in the account: it is enough that he was there doing
penance, for I don't know what displeasure Mrs. Oriana did to her. But
Let's stop this, Sancho, and finish, before another misfortune happens to the
donkey, like Rocinante.
"Even there it would be the devil," said Sancho.
And, firing thirty woes, and sixty sighs, and one hundred and twenty pessetes
and denial of the one who had brought him there, he got up, being overwhelmed
in the middle of the road, like a turquoise bow, unable to finish
straighten; and with all this work he harnessed his donkey, which had also
walked somewhat distracted with the too much freedom of that day. Then raised
to Rocinante, who, if he had a tongue to complain with, would surely
Sancho and his master were not behind him.
Resolutely, Sancho seated Don Quixote on the donkey and roped Don Quixote.
Rocinante; and, taking the donkey as a halter, he went, little more or less,
to where it seemed the royal road might be. And luck, that their
things from good to better he was guiding, he had not yet walked a small league,
when he paved the way, in which he discovered a sale that, despite
his and Don Quixote's liking, it was to be a castle. Sancho insisted that he was
sale, and his master that no, but castle; and the persistence lasted so long, that they had
place, without finishing it, of reaching it, in which Sancho entered, without further ado
inquiry, with all his pack.
Chapter XVI. Of what happened to the ingenious gentleman at the sale that he
I imagined being a castle
The innkeeper, who saw Don Quixote impaled on the donkey, asked Sancho
how bad it was. Sancho replied that it was nothing, but that he had given a
falling from a rock below, and that the ribs came somewhat misty. Had the
landlord per woman to one, not of the condition that those of
such treatment, because naturally she was charitable and hurt from
calamities of his fellow men; and thus, he then went to cure Don Quixote and
made a daughter of his, maiden, girl and very good-looking, the
help heal his host. He served in the sale, also, a wench
Asturian, broad-faced, flat-nape, blunt-nosed, one-eyed
and the other not very healthy. It is true that the gallantry of the body supplied the
other faults: he did not have seven feet from head to toe, and the
her backs, which carried her somewhat, made her look at the ground more than
that she wanted. This gentle wench, then, helped the maiden, and the two
they made a very bad bed for Don Quixote in a room that, in other
times, it gave clear indications that it had served as a haystack for many years.
In which he also housed a muleteer, who had his bed made a little more
beyond that of our Don Quixote. And although it was from the blankets and blankets
of his males, greatly advantageous that of Don Quixote, which only contained
four badly smooth boards, on two not very equal benches, and a mattress that
subtly it looked like a quilt, full of bodoques, which, unless it was shown that they were
of wool by some tears, on the breath, in the hardness, they looked like
pebble, and two sheets made of adarga leather, and a blanket, whose
threads, if they wanted to count, not a single one would be lost from the count.
Don Quixote slept on this damned bed, and then the innkeeper and her daughter
plastered from top to bottom, illuminating Maritornes, which was called
the Asturian; and, as the bizmalle saw the inn so much
parts to Don Quixote, he said that it looked more like blows than falls.
`` It wasn't blows, '' said Sancho, `` but the rock had many peaks and
stumbling.
And that each one had made his cardinal. And he also said:
"Do your mercy, ma'am, so that there are some tow left, not
whoever needs them will be missing; that also hurt me a little
loins.
"That way," replied the innkeeper, "you too must have fallen."
`` I did not fall, '' said Sancho Panza, `` but from the shock I took at seeing
my master, my body hurts in such a way that it seems to me that they have given me
thousand sticks.
"That may well be," said the maid; that many have happened to me
Sometimes dreaming that I fell from a tower below and that I had never quite reached the
ground, and when I woke up from the dream to find myself so bruised and broken
as if he had truly fallen.
-There is the touch, madam -answered Sancho Panza-: that I, without dreaming
nothing, but being more awake than I am now, I find myself with few less
cardinals than my lord Don Quixote.
-What's the name of this gentleman? asked the Asturian Maritornes.
-Don Quixote de la Mancha -answered Sancho Panza-, and he is a gentleman
adventurer, and of the best and strongest that of long times here are
have seen in the world.
-What is an adventurer knight? replied the girl.
-Are you so new in the world that you don't know it? -answered Sancho
Belly-. Well know, my sister, what an adventurous knight is one thing
in two words he looks beaten and emperor. Today is the most unfortunate
creature in the world and the most needy, and tomorrow I would have two or three
crowns of kingdoms to give to his squire.
"Well, how can you, being of such a good lord," said the innkeeper, "no
do you have, it seems, even a county?
`` It's still early, '' answered Sancho, `` because we have only been walking for a month.
looking for adventure, and so far we haven't come across any that
be. And perhaps you have to look for one thing and find another. Truth is that, yes
my lord Don Quixote heals this wound or fall and I am not left stranded
Della, I would not exchange my hopes with the best title in Spain.
Don Quixote was listening very attentively to all these talks, and,
sitting on the bed as best he could, taking the innkeeper's hand, he said:
Believe me, beautiful lady, that you can call yourselves fortunate for having lodged
in this your castle to my person, who is such, that if I do not praise her,
This is why it is often said that self-praise debases; but my
squire will tell you who I am. I only tell you that I will have eternally written in
my memory of the service you have given me, to thank you while
life will last me; and it would please the high heavens that love did not have me
so surrendered and so subject to its laws, and the eyes of that beautiful ungrateful
what do I say between my teeth; that these beautiful maiden were lords
of my freedom.
Confused were the innkeeper and her daughter and good old Maritornes hearing the
reasons of the errant knight, who thus understood them as if he were speaking in
Greek, although they well reached that all were heading to offer and
compliments; and, as not used to such language, they looked at him and
They admired each other, and seemed to them another man of those who were used; and,
Thanking him with venterful reasons for his offers, they left him; and the
Asturian Maritornes cured Sancho, who had needed it no less than his
love.
The muleteer had arranged with her that that night they would rejoice
together, and she had given him her word that, while the
guests and sleeping masters, would fetch him and satisfy his taste in
as much as I send him. And tell about this good girl who never gave such
words that he did not fulfill, even if he gave them on a hill and without a witness
any; because she was very noble, and it was not an affront to be in
that exercise of serving in the sale, because she said that misfortunes and
bad events had brought her to that state.
The hard, narrow, timid, and feigned bed of Don Quixote was first
in the middle of that starry stable, and then, next to him, he made his
Sancho, which only contained a cattail mat and a blanket, which before
It showed to be of flocked anjeo than of wool. These two beds were succeeded by
of the muleteer, made, as has been said, of the enjalmas and all the adornment
of the two best mules he brought, although there were twelve of them, pike, fat and
famous, because he was one of the rich muleteers of Arevalo, according to the
The author of this story, which this muleteer makes particular mention, because he
he knew very well, and they still want to say that it was somewhat related to him. Outside
that Cide Mahamate Benengeli was a very curious historian and very punctual in
everything; and take a good look at it, because those that are referred to, with
being so minimal and so thieves, he did not want to pass them in silence; from where
serious historians may take an example, who tell us about the actions
so short and succinct that they barely reach our lips, leaving
the inkwell, already out of carelessness, malice or ignorance, the most substantial of
the work. Well may there be a thousand times the author of Tablante de Ricamonte, and that
from the other book where the facts of Count Tomillas are told; and with what
punctuality describe it all!
I say, then, that after having visited the muleteer to his herd and gave him the
second I think, he stretched out on his blankets and waited for his
very punctual Maritornes. Sancho was already bizmado and lying down, and, although
he tried to sleep, the pain in his ribs did not allow him; and don Quixote,
with the pain of his own, his eyes were wide like a hare. All the
sale was silent, and in all of it there was no other light than that which gave
a lamp hanging in the middle of the portal burned.
This wonderful stillness, and the thoughts that always our gentleman
brought about the events that are recounted at every step in the books authors of his
Unfortunately, I bring to the imagination one of the strange follies that
well imagine you can. And it was that he imagined having reached a
famous castle - which, as has been said, castles were in his opinion all
the sales where he lodged-, and that the innkeeper's daughter belonged to the lord of the
castle, which, defeated by his gentleness, had fallen in love with him and
promised that that night, in the secret of his parents, he would come to lie with him
a good piece; and, having all this chimera, that he had fabricated,
being firm and valid, he began to ask and think about the dangerous
trance in which his honesty was to be seen, and proposed in his heart not to
commit treachery to his mistress Dulcinea del Toboso, although the queen herself
Geneva with his lady Quintañona were put before him.
Thinking, then, of these absurdities, the time and the hour arrived -that for
he was diminished- from the coming of the Asturian woman, who, in her shirt and
barefoot, hair held in a fustán spangle, with tacit and
attempted steps, he entered the room where the three were staying in search of the
muleteer. But, as soon as she reached the door, Don Quixote felt her, and,
sitting up in bed, despite his bizmas and with pain in his ribs,
he held out his arms to greet his beautiful maiden. The Asturian, who,
All collected and silent, she went with her hands in front of her looking for her beloved,
ran into the arms of Don Quixote, who gripped her tightly with a
doll and, pulling her towards herself, without her daring to speak a word, made her
lay on the bed. Then he felt his shirt, and although she was of
sackcloth, it seemed to him to be of very fine and thin cendal. Brought in the
dolls some glass beads, but they gave him glimpses of precious
oriental pearls. The hair, which somehow pulled to manes, he
marked them by threads of lucid gold from Arabia, whose radiance to that of the
The same sun was darkening. And the breath, which undoubtedly smelled of salad
stiff and stale, it seemed to him that a smell was
smooth and aromatic; and finally he painted her in his imagination of the same
trace and mode that he had read in his books about the other princess who came
to see the ill-fated gentleman, defeated by his loves, with all the ornaments
that are put here. And the poor gentleman was so blind that he
touch, or breath, or other things that the good maiden carried within herself, no
disillusioned him, which could make anyone other than
muleteer; before, it seemed to him that he held the goddess of
loveliness. And, holding her tightly, with a low, loving voice he began to
tell:
-I would like to find myself in terms, beautiful and tall lady, to be able to pay
such a mercy as the one that with the sight of your great beauty you have me
date, but has wanted fortune, which never tires of chasing the
good, put myself in this bed, where I lie so crushed and broken that,
even if I wanted to satisfy yours of my own will, it was impossible. AND
more, that is added to this impossibility a greater one, which is the promised faith
that I have given to the unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso, the only lady of my
hidden thoughts; that if this was not involved, it would not be me
so sandio caballero that he let the fortunate occasion in which he
your great goodness has put me.
Maritornes was very distressed and transpiring, to see herself so attached to Don
Quixote, and, without understanding or paying attention to the reasons I was saying,
he tried, without speaking a word, to detach himself. The good muleteer, to whom
they had awakened their bad desires, from the point that their bribery entered through the
door, he felt it; was attentively listening to everything that Don Quixote
he said, and, jealous that the Asturian had failed to speak for
another, he was getting closer to Don Quixote's bed, and he stayed until
see where those reasons stopped, which he could not understand. But how
saw that the girl was struggling to detach herself and Don Quixote was working to
tenella, finding the mockery bad, raised his arm high and unloaded
such a terrible fist upon the narrow jaws of the loving knight,
that bathed his entire mouth in blood; and, not happy with this, he went up
above the ribs, and with his feet more than trotting, he walked them
all from end to end.
The bed, which was a bit flimsy and of not firm foundations, not being able to
suffer the addition of the muleteer, he found himself on the ground, at whose great noise
the innkeeper woke up, and then imagined that they must be quarrels with
Maritornes, because, having called out to her, she did not respond. With this
suspicion got up, and, lighting a lamp, went to where there was
felt the peel. The girl, seeing that her master was coming, and that he was of
terrible, all medrosic and excited, she took refuge in the bed of Sancho Panza,
that he was still asleep, and there he curled up and curled up. The innkeeper entered
saying:
-Where are you, bitch? Surely these are your things.
In this, Sancho awoke, and, feeling that lump almost above him, he thought
that he had the nightmare, and began to give handfuls to one side and the other, and between
others reached Maritornes with I do not know how many, who, feeling the pain,
setting honesty rolling, he returned to Sancho with so many that, at his
spite, it took away the dream; which, seeing himself treated in that way and
without knowing who, getting up as best he could, he embraced Maritornes, and
between the two they began the most fierce and funny skirmish in the world.
Seeing, then, the muleteer, at the light of the innkeeper's lamp, which one was walking
his lady, leaving Don Quixote, went to dalle the necessary help. It
The innkeeper did the same, but with a different intention, because he went to punish
to the girl, believing without a doubt that she alone was the occasion of all that
harmony. And just as they say: the cat after a while, the rope time, the
rope to the pole, the muleteer gave to Sancho, Sancho to the girl, the girl to him,
the innkeeper to the wench, and all of them wandered in such a hurry that they did not
point of rest; and it was the good thing that the innkeeper's lamp went out, and,
as there were ascuras, they all gave themselves so mercilessly that,
wherever they put their hand, they left no healthy thing.
Perhaps that night was staying at the inn a squad of those who called from
the Old Holy Brotherhood of Toledo, which, hearing anxiously the stranger
uproar of the fight, he grasped his half-stick and the tin box of his
titles, and ascuras entered the room, saying:
-Have to justice! Have the Holy Brotherhood!
And the first one he ran into was Don Quixote's fist, who was
On his toppled bed, lying on his back, meaningless, and,
laying his hand on his beards, he kept saying:
-Favor of justice!
But, seeing that the one he was holding was neither boiling nor wagging, he
understand that he was dead, and that those inside were his
matadors; and with this suspicion he reinforced his voice, saying:
-Close the door of the sale! Look, no one leaves, they have died
here to a man!
This voice startled everyone, and each one left the quarrel to the degree that
it took his voice. The innkeeper retired to his room, the muleteer to his
enjalmas, the girl to her ranch; alone the hapless Don Quixote and Sancho
They couldn't move from where they were. In this the quadrillero released the
Don Quixote's beard, and went out to look for light to look for and light the
criminals; but he did not find it, because the innkeeper, of industry, had
The lamp died when he retired to his room, and he was forced to go to
the fireplace, where, with much work and time, he lit the quadrillero
another lamp.
Chapter XVII. Where the innumerable works that the brave
Don Quixote and his good squire Sancho Panza went to the sale that, due to their
wrong, thought it was castle
Don Quixote had already returned at this time from his parasism, and, with the same
tone of voice with which he had called his squire the day before, when he was
lying in the valley of the stakes, he began to call him, saying:
-Sancho friend, are you sleeping? Are you sleeping, friend Sancho?
"What have I got to sleep on, I am sorry," answered Sancho, full of regret and
of spite-; that it only seems that all the devils have walked with me
tonight?
`` You can believe it there, no doubt, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because, or I know
little, or this castle is haunted. Because you have to know ... More, this what
Now I want to tell you, make me swear that you will have it a secret until after
my death.
"Yes, I swear," answered Sancho.
`` Digolo, '' replied Don Quixote, `` because I am an enemy of having honor taken
to nobody.
`` I say yes, I swear, '' Sancho started to say, `` that I will shut him up until after
the days of your mercy, and pray to God that I can discover it tomorrow.
"Am I doing such bad deeds to you, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "that you would love me
see dead so soon?
"That is not why," Sancho answered, "but because I am an enemy of keeping too much
things, and I wouldn't want them to rot away from me.
"Whatever it may be," said Don Quixote; that I trust your love and you
courtesy; and thus, you must know that tonight one of the most
strange adventures that I will know how to make expensive; and, for telling you shortly,
You will know how recently the daughter of the lord of this castle came to me, which is
the most handsome and beautiful maiden that in much of the earth can be
find. What could I tell you about the adornment of his person? What about his dashing
understanding? What about other hidden things, that, by keeping the faith I must
my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, will I let pass intact and in silence? Single
I want to tell you that, envious of the sky of so much good as luck to me
had put into the hands, or perhaps, and this is most true, that, as
I have said, this castle is enchanted, while I was with her
in very sweet and loving conversations, without my seeing or knowing
where it came from, came a hand attached to the arm of some huge giant
and nodded a handful on my jaws, such that I have them all bathed in
blood; and then it ground me to such a degree that I am worse than yesterday when the
Gallegos, who, due to excesses of Rocinante, did us the wrong that
you know. From which I conjecture that this maiden's beautiful treasure
it must have kept some enchanted Moor, and it must not be for me.
Nor for me either, answered Sancho, because more than four hundred Moors
they have beaten me, so that the grinding of the stakes was
cakes and painted bread. But tell me sir, what do you call this good and weird
adventure, having remained of which we remain? Even your mercy less
wrong, because he had in his hands that incomparable beauty that he said,
but I, what did I have if not the biggest blows that I plan to receive in all my
life? Woe to me and the mother who bore me, I'm not even a gentleman
errant, nor do I ever intend to be, and of all the mischief
Most!
-Then, are you also beaten? Don Quixote answered.
-Didn't I say yes, despite my lineage? -said Sancho.
Don Quixote said, Don’t feel sorry for me, I’ll now make the balm
precious with which we will heal in the blink of an eye.
The quadrillero finished lighting the lamp, and the man who
thought he was dead; And, just as Sancho saw him enter, seeing him come in
shirt and with his head cloth and lamp in hand, and with a very bad
face, he asked his master:
Sir, is this, by chance, the enchanted Moor, who returns to us?
punish, if something was left in the pipeline?
`` It can't be the Moor, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because the enchanted ones don't know
they let anyone see.
"If you don't let yourself be seen, let yourself be felt," said Sancho; if not, tell me my
backs.
`` Mine could also say it, '' answered Don Quixote, `` but it is not
enough clue that to believe that this is the enchanted Moor.
The squad arrived, and, as he found them talking in such calm
conversation was suspended. It is true that Don Quixote was still
face up, without being able to shake, of pure ground and plastered. Came to him
the quadrillero and said to him:
"Well, how's it going, good man?"
"I would speak rather a servant," replied Don Quixote, "if it were you."
Is it used in this land to speak ill luck to knights-errant,
pestle?
The squad, who saw himself being treated so badly by a man with such bad looks,
could not suffer it, and, raising the lamp with all its oil, gave Don
Quixote with him on his head, so that it left him very devastated;
and, as everything remained dark, he left later; and Sancho Panza said:
`` No doubt, sir, this is the enchanted Moor, and he must keep the
treasure for others, and for us only keep the handfuls and
candilazos.
`` That's right, '' answered Don Quixote, `` and we must not pay attention to these things of
incantations, there is no reason to take anger or anger with them; what, how
are invisible and fantastic, we will not find who to take revenge, although more
we try it. Get up, Sancho, if you can, and call the warden desta
strength, and see that I am given some oil, wine, salt and rosemary
to make the salutary balm; that in truth I think I have it well
need now, because a lot of blood is leaking from the wound that this ghost
has given me.
Sancho got up with a lot of pain in his bones, and went ascuras where he was
the innkeeper; and, meeting with the quadrillero, who was listening in
what was stopping his enemy, he said:
-Sir, whoever you are, do us the mercy and benefit of giving us a
little rosemary, oil, salt and wine, which is necessary to cure one of the
best knights-errant on earth, which lies in that
bed, misused by the hands of the enchanted Moor who is in this sale.
When such a squad heard, you considered him a man lacking in sense; and because
It was already beginning to dawn, opened the door of the sale, and, calling the
innkeeper, told him what that good man wanted. The innkeeper provided him with
as much as he wanted, and Sancho took it to Don Quixote, who was with his hands
in the head, complaining of the pain of the lamp, which had not done more
bad than picking up two slightly overgrown bumps, and what he thought it was
blood was nothing but sweat that sweated with the anguish of the past storm.
In resolution, he took his singles, of which he made a compound,
mixing them all and cooking them a good space, until it seemed to him that
they were at their point. Then he asked for a flask to pour it out, and, of course,
there was in the sale, it was resolved to put it in a cruet or leaf oilcan
tin, from whom the innkeeper made a pleasant donation. And then he said about the
collects more than eighty paternostres and as many Hail Marys, salves and
creeds, each word was accompanied by a cross, as a blessing; to everything
Which were present Sancho, the innkeeper and squad; that already he
The muleteer was calmly understanding the benefit of his males.
Having done this, he himself wanted to later experience the virtue of that
precious balm that he imagined; and so, he drank, of what he could not
fit in the bowl and remained in the pot where it had been cooked, almost half
azum; and he barely finished drinking it, when he began to vomit so that
there was nothing left in his stomach; and with the cravings and agitation of the vomit
he sweated profusely, for which he ordered them to tuck him in and leave him
only. They did so, and he fell asleep for more than three hours, at the end of the
which woke up and felt relieved from the body, and in such a better way
of his brokenness that was considered healthy; and truly believed that
He had been right with the Balsam of Fierabrás, and that with that remedy he could
attack from there on, without fear, any ruins,
battles and quarrels, no matter how dangerous.
Sancho Panza, who also had a miracle the improvement of his master, begged him to
give him what was left in the pot, which was not a small amount.
Don Quixote conceded it, and he, taking it in two hands, with good faith and better
Mood, he threw it to the breasts, and packed well little less than his master. It is,
Well, the case that poor Sancho's stomach shouldn't be so delicate
like his master's, and so, first he vomited, they gave him so much craving and
bascas, with so many transients and fainting spells that he thought well and truly
that his last hour had arrived; and, looking so heartbroken and heartbroken,
he cursed the balm and the thief who had given it to him. Seeing you like this don
Quixote, said:
-I believe, Sancho, that all this evil comes from not being a knight,
because I have for me that this liquor should not take advantage of those who do not
are.
"If your grace knew that," replied Sancho, "woe to me and all my
Kinship! Why did you allow me to like it?
At this the brew made its operation, and the poor squire began to
drain through both canals, with such haste that the cattail mat,
on whom he had laid down again, nor the anjeo blanket with which he
covered up, they were more helpful. He sweated and sweated with such parasisms and
accidents, that not only he, but everyone thought that he was running out of
life. This squall and bad experience lasted almost two hours, at the end of the
which was not left as his master, but so crushed and broken that he could not
to have.
But Don Quixote, who, as has been said, felt relieved and healthy, wanted to
then set off to seek adventures, seeming to him that all the time he was there
it took was to take away the world and those in it needy from its favor and
protection; and more with the security and confidence that he carried in his balm. AND
Thus, forced of this desire, he himself saddled Rocinante and saddled the
ass of his squire, whom he also helped to dress and climb on the
donkey. Then he got on horseback, and, getting to a corner of the inn, grabbed
of a sandeel that was there, to serve as a spear.
They were looking at him all who were in the sale, which went from more than
twenty people; the innkeeper's daughter also looked at him, and he too did not
he took his eyes off her, and from time to time he breathed a breath that
it seemed to be ripping him out of the depths of their guts, and everyone thought
that it must be from the pain in his ribs; at least,
Those who had seen him bizmar the night before thought so.
Since they were both on horseback, standing at the door of the sale, he knocked
to the innkeeper, and in a very calm and grave voice he said:
-Many and very great are the grants, Mr. Warden, that in this yours
castle I have received, and I am obliged to thank you every day
of my life. If I can pay you to avenge you of some arrogant who
I have committed any wrongdoing to you, know that my job is none other than to be worth
those who can do little, and avenge those who receive one-eyed, and punish
treachery. Go through your memory, and if you find something like this
to entrust me, there is nothing but decilla; that I promise you, by the order of
gentleman I received, to face you satisfied and paid to all your
Will.
The innkeeper replied with the same calm:
-Sir knight, I have no need for your mercy to avenge me
no wrong, because I know how to take the revenge that seems to me, when I
make. I only need that your grace pay me the expense that tonight
has made in the sale, both of the straw and barley of his two beasts, as of
dinner and beds.
-Then, is this sale? Don Quixote replied.
"And very honored," replied the innkeeper.
`` I have lived up to here deceived, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that in truth
I thought it was a castle, and not bad; but, well, it is so that it is not a castle
but sale, what can be done for now is that you forgive for the pay,
that I cannot contravene the order of the knights errant, of the
which I know true, without having read anything to the contrary so far, that
They never paid for an inn or anything else for sale where they were, because they
Any good welcome that is made to them must by law and by law,
in payment of the insufferable work they suffer looking for the adventures at night
and by day, in winter and in summer, on foot and on horseback, thirsty and hungry,
with heat and cold, subject to all the inclemencies of the sky and to all
the uncomfortable of the earth.
"I have little to do with that," replied the innkeeper; pay me what I know
He owes me, and let's stop tales or chivalry, I don't have an account
with something other than collecting my finances.
"You are a watermelon and a bad innkeeper," answered Don Quixote.
And, putting Rocinante legs and spreading his sandeel, he left the
sale without anyone stopping him, and he, without looking to see if his squire was following him,
it went a long way.
The innkeeper, who saw him go and did not pay him, went to collect from Sancho
Panza, who said that, since his master had not wanted to pay, that neither
he would pay; because, being the squire of a knight errant, as he was, the
The same rule and reason ran for him as for his master in not paying anything
in the inns and sales. The innkeeper was very dazed, and threatened to
if he didn't pay him, he would charge it in a way that weighed him down. To which Sancho
replied that, by the law of chivalry which his master had received, he
he would pay a single cornado, even if it cost him his life; because there was no
lose the good old-fashioned knights-errant for him, nor did he
the squires of those who were about to come to the
world, reproaching him for the breach of such a just jurisdiction.
The bad luck of the unfortunate Sancho wanted that, among the people who were
In the sale, there were four perailes of Segovia, three holes of the
Colt from Córdoba and two neighbors from the Heria de Sevilla, happy people, well
intentional, malicious and playful, which, almost as instigated and
Moved by the same spirit, they came to Sancho, and, getting off his donkey,
one of them entered through the blanket of the guest's bed, and, throwing him on it,
They looked up and saw that the ceiling was somewhat lower than they had
necessary for their work, and they determined to go out to the corral, which
limit the sky. And there, Sancho placed in the middle of the blanket, they began to
lift him up high and relax with him as with a dog for meatballs.
The voices that the miserable manteado gave were so many that they reached the
ears of his master; who, determining to listen carefully, believed that
some new adventure was coming to him, until he clearly knew that the one who
he was shouting was his squire; and, turning the reins, with a punishing gallop
came to the sale, and, finding it closed, went around it to see if he could find
where to enter; but he had not reached the walls of the corral, which were not
very tall, when he saw the bad game that was played to his squire. Violate
go down and up through the air, with such grace and alacrity that, if anger
leave, I have for me to laugh. He tried to climb from the horse at
fences, but he was so bruised and broken that even he could not get off; and
thus, from on top of the horse, he began to say so many denials and baldons
to those who supported Sancho, that it is not possible to hit scribes; more
not for this did they cease their laughter and their work, nor did the flying Sancho
he left his complaints, already mixed with threats, now with pleas; plus everything
he used little, nor did he take advantage, until out of sheer tiredness they left him.
They carried his donkey there, and, getting on top of him, they wrapped him in their overcoat. AND
the compassionate Maritornes, seeing him so fatigued, seemed to be well
succor him with a jug of water, and thus, he was pulled from the well, for being more
cold. Sancho took him, and taking him to his mouth, stopped at the voices that his master
gave him, saying:
-Son Sancho, don't drink water! Son, don't drink it, it will kill you! You see? Here
I have the most holy balm -and I was showing him the cup of the concoction-, that with
two drops that you drink will heal without a doubt.
To these voices Sancho turned his eyes, as if from across, and said with other
greater:
-Has luckily been forgotten at your mercy how I am not a knight, or
Do you want me to finish vomiting my entrails from last night?
Save your liquor with all the heck and leave it to me.
And finishing saying this and starting to drink were all one; more, like al
first drink he saw that it was water, did not want to go ahead, and begged Maritornes
let it be brought to her with wine, and she did so willingly, and
he paid out of his own money; because, in effect, it is said of her that, although
I was in that deal, I had some shadows and far from Christian.
Just as Sancho drank, he gave his ass to his knees, and, opening the
door of the sale wide open, he walked out of it, very glad he had not
paid nothing and having left with his intention, although it had been at the cost
of their customary guarantors, which were their backs. It is true that the
innkeeper kept his saddlebags in payment of what was owed him; more Sancho
he did not miss them, as he was disturbed. The innkeeper wanted to secure the
door just as he saw it outside, but the manteadores did not consent to it,
they were people who, although Don Quixote was truly one of the knights
errant of the Round Table, they will not estimate him in two ardites.
Chapter XVIII. Where are the reasons that Sancho Panza went through with his
Mr. Don Quixote, with other adventures worth telling
Sancho came to his master, withered and fainted; so much so that he couldn't herd his
donkey. When Don Quixote saw him that way, he said:
-Now I just believe, good Sancho, that that castle or sale, that it is
delighted without a doubt; for those who so heinously took up hobbies
with you, what could they be but ghosts and people from the other world? And I confirm
this for having seen that, when he was by the fences of the corral looking
the acts of your sad tragedy, it was not possible for me to climb them, nor
I was less able to get off Rocinante, because they must have delighted me; that
I swear to you, by the faith of who I am, that if I could go up or down, that I would
take revenge so that those troublemakers and scoundrels would remember
mockery forever, even though in doing so he knew how to contravene the laws of
the cavalry, which, as I have told you many times, do not consent to
gentleman lay hands against who is not, if not in defense of his
own life and person, in case of urgent and great need.
-I would also take revenge if I could, whether or not I was knighted, but
I could not; although I have for me that those who were happy with me were not
ghosts or enchanted men, as your grace says, but men of
flesh and blood like us; and all, as I heard them name when I
They turned around, they had their names: that one was called Pedro Martínez, and the
another Tenorio Hernández, and the innkeeper I heard his name was Juan Palomeque the
Left handed. So, sir, not being able to jump over the fences of the corral, nor get off
of the horse, in al was that in enchantments. And what I get out of clean
of all this is that these adventures that we are looking for, after all,
they have to bring us to so many misadventures that we do not know which is our foot
right. And what would be better and more successful, according to my little understanding,
it was to return to our place, now that it is time to harvest and
understand in the hacienda, leaving us to walk from mint to Mecca and from zoca to
colodra, as they say.
"How little do you know, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "of a chivalric ailment!"
Shut up and be patient, what day will come where you see by sight of eyes how
It is an honorable thing to walk in this exercise. If not, tell me: what greater contentment
there may be in the world, or what taste can be equaled to beating a
battle and to triumph over your enemy? None, without a doubt.
"That is the way it must be," answered Sancho, "since I don't know; I only know that,
after we are knights errant, or your grace is (that I do not
there is why you count me in such an honorable number), we have never won a battle
some, if it was not that of the Biscayan, and even from that came your mercy
with half an ear and half a headpiece less; that, later here, everything has been sticks
and more sticks, handfuls and more handfuls, taking advantage of the maintenance
and having been succeeded by enchanted people, on whom I cannot take revenge,
to know how far the taste of the enemy's defeat goes, as
your grace says.
"That is the sorrow that I have and that you should have, Sancho," answered Don
Quixote-; but, from now on, I will try to have at hand some
sword made by such mastery, that whoever takes it with him cannot
do any kind of incantation; And it could still be that the
that of Amadís, when he was called the Knight of the Burning
Sword, which was one of the best swords that a knight had in the world,
because, if he had the said virtue, he cut like a razor, and not
there was armor, strong and enchanted as it was, that stood before him.
`` I am so fortunate, '' said Sancho, `` that when that was and your grace
came to find such a sword, he would only come to serve and take advantage of the
armed knights, like balm; and the squires, let them go
duels.
`` Don't be afraid of that, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` heaven will do better
with you.
It is these colloquia Don Quixote and his squire were going, when he saw Don Quixote
that on the way they were going a great and thick dust was coming towards them;
and, seeing her, he turned to Sancho and said:
-This is the day, oh Sancho! In which the good that he has for me must be seen
saved my luck; This is the day, I say, in which it has to be shown, both
as in another one, the value of my arm, and in which I have to do works
Let them remain written in the Book of Fame for all the centuries to come.
Do you see that dust that rises there, Sancho? Well, everything is curdled
a very copious army that of diverse and innumerable people there
comes marching.
`` On that account, there must be two, '' said Sancho, `` because this opposite party
another similar dust rises as well.
Don Quixote looked at him again, and saw that this was the truth; and, rejoicing
very much, he thought, without a doubt, that they were two armies coming to
to charge and find himself in the middle of that spacious plain; because
I had the fantasy of those battles filled at all hours and moments,
enchantments, events, follies, loves, challenges, which in the books of
chivalry is counted, and all that he spoke, thought, or did was
aimed at similar things. And the dust that she had seen was kicking her up
two large herds of sheep and rams that, by that very road,
two different parties were coming, which, with the dust, did not
watch until they got close. And with so much zeal Don Quixote affirmed that
They were armies, which Sancho came to believe and tell him:
-Sir, what are we to do then?
-That? said Don Quixote, "to favor and help the needy and
helpless. And you have to know, Sancho, that this one who comes from our forehead
He is led and guided by the great emperor Aliphapharon, lord of the great island
Trapobana; This other one who marches behind my back is that of his enemy, the king
of the garamantas, Pentapolén of the Arremangado Arm, because it always enters
in battles with the bare right arm.
"Well, why do these two gentlemen love each other so badly?" asked Sancho.
-Will yourselves badly -answered Don Quixote- because this Alephapharon is a
pagan foribundo and is in love with the daughter of Pentapolín, who is a very
beautiful and also graceful lady, and she is a Christian, and her father does not
wants to hand over the pagan king if he does not first leave the law of his false prophet
Muhammad and turns to his own.
`` For my beards, '' said Sancho, `` if Pentapolín does not do very well, and let him
I have to help as soon as I can!
`` In that you will do what you must, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` because, to enter
in such battles, knighthood is not required.
"That is well enough for me," answered Sancho, "but where shall we put this
Ass that we are sure to find him after the skirmish is over? Because
to enter it in such cavalry I do not believe that it is in use until
agora.
"That is true," said Don Quixote. What you can do from him is to let him
adventures, whether or not it is lost, because there will be so many horses that
We will have, after we are victorious, that Rocinante is still in danger
do not trade him for another. But pay attention to me and look, I want to tell you
from the most leading knights that in these two armies come. AND,
so that you can better see and notice them, let's retreat to that attic that is there
ago, whence the two armies must be discovered.
They did it there, and stood on a hill, from which they could see well
the two herds that made Don Quixote an army, if the clouds of the
dust that they raised did not disturb them and blind their sight; but, with all this,
seeing in his imagination what he did not see or had, with a raised voice he began
to say:
-That knight that you see there of the Jaldes arms, who carries on his shield a
crowned lion, rendered at the feet of a maiden, is the brave
Laurcalco, lord of the Puente de Plata; the other of the arms of the flowers
of gold, which has three silver crowns on its shield in a blue field, is the
feared Micocolembo, Grand Duke of Quirocia; the other member
Gigantes, who is at his right hand, is the never fearful Brandabarbarán
of Boliche, lord of the three Arabias, who comes armed with that leather of
serpent, and its shield is a gate which, according to is fame, is one of the
of the temple that Samson demolished, when with his death he avenged his
enemies. But turn your eyes to this other part and you will see ahead and in the
facing another army to the always victorious and never defeated Helmsman of
Carcajona, prince of Nueva Vizcaya, who comes armed with weapons
barracks, blue, green, white and yellow, and brings in the
shield a golden cat in a tawny field, with a letter that says: Miau, que
is the beginning of his lady's name, which is said to be the peerless
Miulina, daughter of Duke Alfeñiquén del Algarbe; the other, who loads and oppresses
the loins of that mighty alfana, which brings weapons like white snow
and the white shield and without any company, is a new gentleman, of a nation
French, called Pierres Papín, lord of the baronies of Utrique; the other,
that beats the flanks with the carcaños shoes to that painted and light
zebra, and brings the weapons of the blue veros, is the mighty Duke of
Nerbia, Spartafilardo del Bosque, who carries a company on his shield
esparraguera, with a letter in Castilian that says thus: Trace my luck.
And in this way he was naming many knights of one and the other
squad, that he imagined, and gave everyone their weapons, colors,
companies and nicknames unexpectedly, taken from the imagination of his never seen
craziness; and, without stopping, he continued saying:
-This frontier squad is formed and made by people from different nations: here
there are those who drank the sweet waters of the famous Xanthos; the hilly ones that
they step on the massive fields; those who sift the very fine and small gold in the
happy Arabia; those who enjoy the famous and cool banks of the clearing
Thermodont; those who bleed by many and diverse routes to the golden Pactolo;
the Numidians, doubtful in their promises; the Persians, famous bows and arrows;
the Parthians, the Medes, who fight while fleeing; the Arabs, of changeable houses;
the dates, as cruel as white; the Ethiopians, with pierced lips, and
other infinite nations, whose faces I know and see, although of the
names I do not remember. In this squad come those who drink the
crystalline currents of the Betis olive tree; those that smooth and polish their
faces with the liquor of the always rich and golden Tajo; those who enjoy the
profitable waters of the divine Genil; those who tread the Tartesian fields, of
abundant grasses; those who rejoice in the Elysian meadows of Jerez; the
from La Mancha, rich and crowned with blonde ears of corn; those of iron clothed,
ancient relics of Gothic blood; those who bathe in Pisuerga, famous
by the meekness of its stream; those that their cattle graze in the
extensive meadows of the tortuous Guadiana, celebrated for its hidden course;
those who tremble with the cold of the silvous Pyrenees and with the white flakes
of the raised Apennine; finally, how many all of Europe itself contains and
encloses.
Oh my God, and how many provinces did he say, how many nations did he name, giving
each one, with marvelous alacrity, the attributes that belonged to him, all
engrossed and steeped in what he had read in his lying books!
Sancho Panza was hanging on his words, without speaking any of them, and
from time to time, he turned his head to see if he saw the knights and giants
that his master named; and, as he did not discover any of them, he said:
-Sir, I entrust to the devil a man, neither giant, nor knight of how many
your grace says it seems for all this; at least, I don't see them; maybe
everything must be enchantment, like the ghosts of last night.
-How do you say that? Don Quixote answered. Can't you hear the neighing of the
horses, the sound of bugles, the noise of the drums?
"I hear nothing else," answered Sancho, "but many bleating sheep and
rams.
And that was the truth, because the two herds were already approaching.
`` The fear you have, '' said Don Quixote, `` makes you, Sancho, that you neither see nor
hey to the right; because one of the effects of fear is to disturb the senses
and make things not seem what they are; and if it is that you fear so much,
retreat to a part and leave me alone, that alone is enough to give victory to the
part to whom I give my help.
And, saying this, he put the spurs to Rocinante, and, putting the spear in the
Ready, he came down from the coast like a thunderbolt. Sancho shouted at him, saying:
-Your mercy, Mr. Don Quixote, I vow to God that they are
rams and sheep that he is going to attack! Turn back, wretched father
who begot me! What madness is this? See that there is no giant or gentleman
no, no cats, no weapons, no broken or whole shields, or see you blue
nor devilish. What does he do? I am a sinner to God!
Not for those did Don Quixote return; Before, in loud voices, he was saying:
-Hey, gentlemen, those of you who follow and militate under the flags of the
brave emperor Pentapolín of the Arm Sleeve, follow me all: you will see
how easily I give him revenge on his enemy Alepharon de la Trapobana!
This saying, he entered by means of the flock of sheep, and began
spear them with as much courage and boldness as if he really spears his
mortal enemies. The shepherds and ranchers who came with the herd
they were shouting at him not to do that; but, seeing that they did not take advantage,
the slings fell away and began to greet the ears with stones like
the fist. Don Quixote was not cured of stones; before, going to
everywhere, it said:
"Where are you, proud Alifanfuón?" Come to me; that I am just a gentleman,
that you want, from only to alone, to test your strength and take your life, in pain
from which you give the brave Pentapolín Garamanta.
At this a brook pellet arrived, and, giving him on one side, buried him
two ribs in the body. Looking so battered, he no doubt believed that
was either dead or ill, and, remembering his liquor, he took out his wine glass and
put it in your mouth, and began to pour liquor into your stomach; more, before
had just packed what seemed to him to be quite a lot, another
almond and gave him in the hand and in the cruet so full that he made it
pieces, carrying three or four teeth and molars from his mouth to him, and
badly bruising two fingers of his hand.
Such was the first blow, and such the second, that it was forced on the poor
gentleman give with him from the horse below. The shepherds came to him and
they believed that they had died; and so, with great haste, they picked up their
cattle, and loaded the carcasses, which were more than seven, and, without
find out something else, they left.
All this time Sancho was on the slope, looking at the follies that
his master did, and ripped off his beard, cursing the time and point in
that fortune had been made known to him. Seeing him, then, fallen into the
the ground, and that the shepherds had already left, he descended the slope and came to
him, and found him very bad art, though he had not lost consciousness, and
said to him:
`` Didn't I tell you, Mr. Don Quixote, to turn around, that those who were going to
to attack were not armies, but herds of rams?
-How that can disappear and counteract that thief of the wise man my enemy.
Know, Sancho, that it is very easy for such people to make us look like what they
want, and this evil one who persecutes me, envious of the glory that he saw that
I had to reach this battle, the enemy squads have returned
in flocks of sheep. If not, do one thing, Sancho, for my life, because you
disappoint and see to be true what I tell you: get on your ass and follow them
beautifully, and you will see how, by moving away from here a little, they become
their being first, and, ceasing to be rams, they are grown men,
as I painted them first ... But don't go now, I need you
favor and help; come to me and see how many teeth and teeth are missing, what
I don't think I have any left in my mouth.
Sancho got so close that he almost put his eyes in his mouth, and he went to
time that the balm had already worked on Don Quixote's stomach; and, to
time that Sancho came to look at his mouth, he threw himself, stronger than a
shotgun, how much inside he had, and he found all of it in the beard of the
compassionate squire.
-Santa Maria! said Sancho, "and what is this that has happened to me?" Definitely,
this sinner is mortally wounded, for he vomits blood from his mouth.
But, paying attention a little more to it, he noticed in the color, taste and smell,
that it was not blood, but the balsam of the cruet that he had seen
to drink; and it was so much disgust that he took that, turning his stomach,
vomited his guts on his own lord, and they were both like
pearls. Sancho went to his donkey to get from the saddlebags with what
clean himself and with what to heal his master; and, as he did not find them, he was on the verge of
lose your mind. Curse himself again, and proposed in his heart to leave his
love and return to his land, even if he lost the salary of what was served and the
hopes of the government of the promised island.
Don Quixote arose at this, and, putting his left hand on his mouth,
because his teeth did not just come out, he took the reins with the other
of Rocinante, who had never left his master - such was loyal
and well conditioned-, and it was where his squire was, of breasts on
his ass, with his hand on his cheek, in the guise of a thoughtful man as well. AND,
seeing Don Quixote in that way, with signs of such sadness,
said:
-Know, Sancho, that he is not one man more than another if he does not do more than another.
All these storms that happen to us are signs that soon we must
calm down the weather and things have to happen to us well; because it is not possible
that good and evil are durable, and it follows that, having
Evil lasted long, good is near. So you must not grieve
for the misfortunes that happen to me, because you don't have a part of them.
-How not? Sancho answered. By any chance, the one they kept yesterday, was it
other than my father's son? And the saddlebags that I am missing today, with all
My jewels, are they from another than the same?
"Are you missing your saddlebags, Sancho?" Don Quixote said.
"Yes, I am lacking," answered Sancho.
"Like that, we don't have anything to eat today," replied Don Quixote.
-That's out, -answered Sancho- when the herbs were missing from these meadows.
that your grace says it knows, with which they tend to supply such faults
the ill-fated errant knights as your grace is.
`` With all that, '' answered Don Quixote, `` will I now take a quarter
of bread, or a loaf and two heads of herring sardines, how many herbs
describes Dioscorides, even if it was the one illustrated by Dr. Laguna. More,
With all this, get on your ass, Sancho the good, and come after me; that
God, who is the provider of all things, must not be lacking, and more
walking as much in your service as we walk, because the mosquitoes of the
air, nor to the worms of the earth, nor to the tadpoles of the water; And it is
so pious that he makes his sun rise on the good and the bad, and it rains
on the unjust and just.
`` Your grace was better, '' said Sancho, `` for a preacher than for
errant knight.
`` The knights-errant knew and must know everything, Sancho, '' said Don
Quixote-, because there was a knight-errant in past centuries that
stopped to make a sermon or talk, in the middle of a real field, as if
was a graduate of the University of Paris; from where it is inferred that never
the spear blunted the pen, nor the pen the spear.
`` Now, be that as your grace says, '' answered Sancho, `` let's go
Now from here, and let's try where to stay tonight, and God forbid it is
partly where there are no blankets, no manteadores, no ghosts, no moors
delighted; that if there are, I will give the devil the herd and the squiggle.
`` Ask God, son, '' said Don Quixote, `` and you guide where
You want, this time I want to leave it to your choice to host us. But give me
hand here and touch me with your finger, and take a good look at how many teeth and molars
I am missing from this right side of my upper jaw, where I feel the pain.
Sancho put his fingers in, and, tempting him, said:
-How many molars did your grace used to have in this part?
`` Four, '' answered Don Quixote, `` out of the tailpiece, all of them whole and very
healthy.
"Take a good look at what you say, sir," replied Sancho.
`` I say four, if not five, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because in all my
life they have removed a tooth or tooth from my mouth, it has not fallen or eaten
of neguijón nor of rheumatism some.
"Well, in this lower part," said Sancho, "your mercy has no more than
two and a half molars, and in the upper one, neither half nor none, that all is
as smooth as the palm of the hand.
"No luck!" said Don Quixote, hearing the sad news that his
Squire gave him-, what more I wish that my arm had been knocked down,
as it were not that of the sword; because I let you know, Sancho, that the mouth
without grinding wheels is like a mill without stone, and in much more a
tooth than a diamond. But to all this we who profess are subject
the narrow order of chivalry. Come up, friend, and guide, that I will follow you
at the rate you want.
Sancho did so, and went where he thought he might find
foster care, without leaving the royal road, which I used to go there very often.
Leaving, then, little by little, because the pain in Don Quixote's jaws
He would not let him calm down or attend to hurry, Sancho wanted to entertain him and
amuse yourself by saying something to him; and, among others that he said, was what
it will be said in the next chapter.
Chapter XIX. Of the discreet reasons that Sancho passed with his master, and of
the adventure that happened to him with a dead body, with other events
Famous
-I seem to me, my lord, that all these misadventures that these days have
happened, without a doubt they have been a penalty for the sin committed by your
mercy against the order of his knighthood, not having fulfilled the oath
who did not eat bread to tablecloths or with the queen folgar, with everything
that which follows and your grace swore to comply, until removing
that Malandrino almete, or as the Moor is called, that I do not remember
well.
"You are quite right, Sancho," said Don Quixote; more, to tell you the truth,
this had passed from my memory; and you can also have by the way
that because of not having agreed to me in time that happened to you
of the blanket; but I will make the amendment, what modes are there of composition in the
order of chivalry for everything.
"Well, did I swear something, for good measure?" Sancho answered.
`` It doesn't matter that you haven't sworn, '' said Don Quixote, `` it's enough that I understand
that you are not very sure of participants, and, yes or no, it will not be bad
provide us with a remedy.
`` Well, if that's the case, '' said Sancho, `` look, your grace doesn't turn to
forget this, like the oath; maybe they will come back to the
ghosts of rejoicing with me again, and even with your grace if they see him
so stubborn.
In these and other talks it took them the night in the middle of the road, without having
nor discover where they were gathered that night; and what was not good
in this it was that they perished of hunger; that, with the lack of saddlebags,
all the pantry and massing were missing. And, to finish confirming this
Unfortunately, an adventure happened to them that, without any artifice,
it really did. And it was that the night closed with some darkness;
but, with all this, they walked, Sancho believing that, since that path was
real, one or two leagues away, with good reason, he would find some sale in it.
Going, then, in this way, the dark night, the hungry squire and the master
wanting to eat, they saw that by the same way they were going they were coming towards
them great multitude of lights, which seemed nothing but stars that
they moved. Sancho was amazed to see them, and Don Quixote did not have them all
with him; the one pulled his donkey's halter, and the other the reins on his
rocino, and they stood, looking carefully at what that could be,
and they saw that the fires were getting closer to them, and the more they
they arrived, they seemed older; at whose sight Sancho began to tremble like a
He was flustered, and the hair on Don Quixote's head stood on end; which,
perking up a bit, he said:
-This, without a doubt, Sancho, must be a very great and very dangerous adventure,
where it will be necessary for me to show all my courage and effort.
"Wretched me!" -answered Sancho-; if this adventure were of
ghosts, as it seems to me, where will there be ribs that suffer from it?
`` No matter how ghosts they are, '' said Don Quixote, `` I will not allow you to
touch the hair of clothing; that if they made fun of you the other time, it was
because I could not jump the walls of the corral, but now we are in
open field, where I can as I want to wring my sword.
"And if you love them and they make you feel like they did the other time," said Sancho,
What will it benefit from being in the open field or not?
"With all that," replied Don Quixote, "I beg you, Sancho, have a good
Courage, that experience will give you to understand what I have.
"Yes, I will, if it pleases God," answered Sancho.
And, the two of them moving aside to the side of the road, they looked attentively again
what that of those walking lights could be; and from there to very
little discovered many jackets, whose fearful vision of all points
finished the spirit of Sancho Panza, who began to give tooth to tooth,
like someone who is cold from a quarter; and the beating and flashing grew more
when they distinctly saw what it was, because they discovered up to twenty
Jackets, all on horseback, with their flaming axes in their hands;
behind which came a litter covered in mourning, which was followed
another six on horseback, mourning to the feet of the mules; how good
They saw that they were not horses in the calm with which they walked. The
Jackets muttering among themselves, in a low, compassionate voice. This stranger
vision, at such hours and in such depopulated, was well enough to put fear in
Sancho's heart, and even his master's; and so it was in terms of gift
Quixote, that Sancho had already given through with all his effort. It
The opposite happened to his master, who at that point was represented in his
imagination to the vivid that this was one of the adventures of his books.
It was imagined to him that the litter was litter where some ill-fated or
dead knight, whose revenge was reserved for him alone; and, undone
another speech, he raised his sandeel, got well in his chair, and with gentle
verve and continent stood in the middle of the road where the jackets
they were forced to pass, and when he saw them nearby he raised his voice and said:
-Stop, gentlemen, or whoever you are, and tell me who
you are, where do you come from, where are you going, what is it that you carry on those walks;
that, according to the samples, either you have dated, or you have dated, some
misguided, and it is convenient and necessary that I know it, or to
to punish you for the evil that you inflicted, or to avenge yourself on the one-eyed man that you
fied.
-Let's go quickly -answered one of the jackets- and the sale is far away,
and we cannot stop to give as much account as you ask.
And, biting the mule, he went forward. This response was greatly felt don
Quixote, and, locking the brake, said:
-Stop and be rather a servant, and give me an account of what I have asked you;
if not, with me you are all in battle.
It was the amazing mule, and when he took it by the bridle he was frightened so that,
Rearing up on his feet, he found his owner by the haunches on the ground. A waiter
who was on foot, seeing the jacket fall, began to revile Don Quixote,
which, already enraged, without waiting any longer, enlisting his sandeel, attacked
to one of the mourners, and, unhappily, he found him on the ground; and,
stirring for others, it was a matter of seeing with the alacrity that the
it attacked and thwarted; that it seemed only that at that moment they had
born wings to Rocinante, as he was light and proud.
All the jackets were fearful and unarmed people, and thus, with ease,
in a moment they left the fray and began to run through that field with
the burning axes, which looked nothing but those of the masks that in
night of rejoicing and party run. The mourners, likewise, scrambled and
wrapped in their skirts and wolves, they could not move; so, very to his
Except, Don Quixote beat them all and made them leave the wrong place of their
degree, because everyone thought that he was not a man, but a devil of
hell that came out to remove the dead body that in the litter they carried.
Sancho looked at everything, admired by the ardor of his lord, and said between
Yes:
-Undoubtedly this my master is as brave and hard working as he says.
There was a burning ax on the ground, next to the first one that brought down the
mule, in whose light Don Quixote could see him; and, getting to him, he put the
sandeel tip on face, telling him to surrender; if not, what will
would kill. To which the fallen man replied:
-I am given up, because I can't move, I have one leg
Broken; I beg at your mercy, if he is a Christian gentleman, not to
mate; that he will commit a great sacrilege, that I have a degree and I have the
first orders.
`` Well, who the hell brought you here, '' said Don Quixote, `` being a man
of Church?
"Who, sir?" replied the fallen man, "my misfortune."
"Well, another greater one threatens you," said Don Quixote, "if you don't satisfy me at all
how much I asked you first.
"Your grace will easily be satisfied," replied the lawyer; and
Thus, your grace will know that, although I previously said that I was a graduate,
I'm just a bachelor, and call me Alonso López; I am a native of Alcobendas;
I come from the city of Baeza with eleven other priests, who are the ones
they fled with the axes; we are going to the city of Segovia accompanying a body
dead, who goes in that litter, which belongs to a gentleman who died in
Baeza, where it was deposited; And now, as I say, we carried his bones to his
grave, which is in Segovia, where it is from.
-And who killed him? asked Don Quixote.
`` God, through some pestilential fever that they gave him, '' answered the
bachelor.
`` Such luck, '' said Don Quixote, `` has taken Our Lord away from work.
that he would have to avenge his death if someone else had killed him;
but, having been killed by the one who killed him, there is nothing but silence and shrinking the
shoulders, because I would do the same if I killed myself. And i want you to know
your reverence that I am a gentleman of La Mancha, called Don
Quixote, and it is my trade and exercise to walk the world straightening one-eyed
and defying grievances.
`` I don't know how it can be to straighten one-eyed people, '' said the bachelor,
by right you have made me one-eyed, leaving me a broken leg, the
which will not look straight in all the days of your life; and the offense that in
me you have undone has been to leave me aggrieved so that I will stay
wronged forever; and it has been a sad misfortune to run into you, what are you going to do
looking for adventure.
"Not all things," answered Don Quixote, "happen in the same way." The
It was hurt, Mr. Bachelor Alonso López, in coming, as you came, from
night, dressed in those surplice, with flaming axes,
praying, covered in mourning, that you properly resemble a bad thing and
another world; and thus, I could not fail to fulfill my obligation
attacking you, and attacking you even though I truly knew that you were the
memos satanases of hell, that by such I judged you and always had.
`` Since my luck has wanted it that way, '' said the bachelor, `` I beg your
mercy, gentleman errant (what a bad walk you have given me), help me
to get out from under this mule, which has my leg taken between the
stirrup and chair.
-I'll speak for tomorrow! said Don Quixote. And how long will you wait
to tell me your eagerness?
Then he called out to Sancho Panza to come; but he was not cured of coming,
because he was busy looting a spare serpent that they brought
those good gentlemen, well supplied with things to eat. Did sancho
sack of his overcoat, and, gathering all he could and fit in the bag,
loaded his donkey, and then he went to the voices of his master and helped carry the
lord bachelor of the oppression of the mule; and, putting him on top of it, he
gave the ax, and Don Quixote told him to follow the defeat of his
companions, who on his part asked forgiveness of the wrong, that there was no
been in his hand to stop having done. Sancho also said to him:
-If those gentlemen want to know who has been the brave that such
He put them, your grace will tell them that he is the famous Don Quixote de la Mancha,
which by another name is called the Knight of the Sad Figure.
With this, the bachelor left; and Don Quixote asked Sancho what
had moved to call him the Knight of the Sad Figure, more then than
never.
`` I'll tell you, '' Sancho answered, `` because I've been looking at the
the light of that ax that that malandante carries, and it truly has
your grace the meanest figure, of little here, that I have ever seen; and
it must have caused, or the fatigue of this combat, or the lack of
molars and teeth.
`` It is not that, '' answered Don Quixote, `` but the wise man, in whose charge he must
to be writing the history of my exploits, it will have seemed to him that it will be
well that I take some appellative name, as all the
past knights: which one was called the one with the Fiery Sword; which one
Unicorn; that one, of the Maidens; this one, the one with the Phoenix Bird; the other, the
Griffin Knight; estotro, that of Death; and by these names and
Insignia were known throughout the roundness of the earth. And so I say that
the sage already said will have put you on the tongue and in the thought now
that you call me the Knight of the Sad Figure, as I intend to call myself
from now on; and, so that such a name fits me better, I determine
have a very sad figure painted on my shield when there is room.
"There is no need to waste time and money to make that figure," said Sancho.
but what has to be done is that your grace discover his and give
face to those who look at him; that, without more or more, and without another image or
shield, they will call him that of the Sad Figure; and believe me I'm telling you the truth,
because I promise to your mercy, sir, and this is said in mockery, that
hunger and the lack of teeth makes him so angry that, as already
I have said, the sad painting may be very well excused.
Don Quixote laughed at Sancho's grace, but, nevertheless, he proposed
be called by that name in being able to paint his shield, or rodela, as he had
imagined.
At this the bachelor returned and said to Don Quixote:
-Forget me to say that your grace warns that he is decomulsed
for having violently laid hands on a sacred thing: juxta illud: Yes
Wanted your devil, etc.
"I do not understand that Latin," replied Don Quixote, "but I know very well that I did not
the hands, but this sandeel; how much more, that I did not think it offended
priests or things of the Church, whom I respect and adore as a Catholic
and faithful Christian that I am, but to ghosts and vestiges of the other world; and,
When that is the case, in my memory I have what happened to Cid Ruy Díaz,
when he broke the chair of that king's ambassador in front of His Holiness
of the Pope, for which he decomposed it, and that day the good Rodrigo de
Live as a very honored and brave knight.
On hearing this, the bachelor left, as has been said, without replying
word. Don Quixote would like to see if the body that came in the litter
They were bones or not, but Sancho did not consent, saying:
-Sir, your grace has ended this dangerous adventure as safely as possible
of all that I have seen; these people, although defeated and shattered,
It could be that he realized that one person beat them alone, and,
flushed and ashamed of this, they would rebuild themselves and look for us, and we
give what to understand. The donkey is as it should, the mountain near, the
hunger burdens, we must not do but retreat with a gentle beat of feet,
And, as they say, the dead go to the grave and the living to the loaf.
And, holding his donkey, he begged his master to follow him; which,
Seeming to him that Sancho was right, without replying again, he followed him. AND,
shortly after they were walking between two mountains, they found themselves in a
spacious and hidden valley, where they got off; and Sancho relieved the donkey,
and, lying on the green grass, with the sauce of their hunger, they had lunch,
ate, lunched, and dined to the same point, satisfying their
stomachs with more than one lunch box than the clergymen of the deceased
-which are rarely allowed to pass badly- in their spare part they brought.
But another misfortune happened to them, which Sancho considered the worst of all, and
It was that they had no wine to drink, not even water to reach their mouths; and,
haunted by thirst, said Sancho, seeing that the meadow where they were was
full of green and small grass, which will be said in the next chapter.
Chapter XX. Of the never seen or heard adventure that with less danger
It was finished as a famous knight in the world, like the one that finished the brave
Don Quijote of La Mancha
-It is not possible, my lord, but these herbs give testimony that by
here near must be some source or stream that these herbs moisten;
And so, it will be good that we go a little further, that we will find where
we can quench this terrible thirst that wears us down, which undoubtedly causes
greater pain than hunger.
Don Quixote's advice seemed good, and, taking over from
Rocinante, and Sancho from the halter to his donkey, after having
he the reliefs that remained from dinner, began to walk through the meadow
up to touch, because the darkness of the night did not let them see anything
some; but they had not walked two hundred steps, when it reached their ears
a great noise of water, as that of some great and raised cliffs
fell off. The noise made them very happy, and, stopping to listen to
which part sounded, they heard another roar at the wrong time that watered their happiness
of the water, especially Sancho, who was naturally fearful and of little
cheer up. I say they heard that they beat to the beat, with a certain creaking
of irons and chains, which, accompanied by the furious roar of the water, which
they put fear to any other heart than that of Don Quixote.
It was night, as has been said, dark, and they happened to enter between
tall trees, whose leaves, moved by the soft wind, made a
fearful and meek noise; so that the loneliness, the place, the darkness,
the noise of the water with the rustle of the leaves, everything caused horror and
fright, and more when they saw that neither the blows stopped, nor the wind
he slept, nor did morning come; adding to all this is ignoring the place
where they were. But Don Quixote, accompanied by his intrepid heart,
He jumped on Rocinante, and, embracing his buckler, he dipped his sandeel and said:
-Sancho friend, you must know that I was born, wanting from heaven, in this
our iron age, to resurrect in it the golden age, or the golden age, as
is usually called. I am the one for whom dangers are kept,
great deeds, brave deeds. I am, I say again, who has to
resurrect those of the Round Table, the Twelve of France and the Nine of the
Fame, and the one who has to forget the Platires, the Tablantes, Olivantes
and Tirantes, Febos and Belianises, with all the caterva of famous
knights errant of the past time, doing in this in which I find myself
such greatness, strangeness and weapons facts, that obscure the most
clear that they fied. Well notes, faithful and legal squire, the darkness
this night, its strange silence, the deaf and confused roar of these
trees, the fearful noise of that water in whose search we come, that
It seems to be tumbling and collapsing from the high mountains of the moon, and
that incessant hitting that hurts us and hurts our ears; which
things, all together and each one by itself, are enough to instill fear,
fear and dread in the chest of Mars himself, the more in the one who does not
he is used to such events and adventures. Well all this
that I paint you are incentives and awakenings of my spirit, which already makes
my heart bursts in my chest, with the desire I have to undertake this
adventure, no matter how difficult it is. So, tighten the
cinches Rocinante and stay with God, and wait for me here until three days
more, in which, if he does not return, you can return to our village, and
from there, for doing me mercy and a good deed, you will go to Toboso, where you will say to
the incomparable my lady Dulcinea that her captive knight died for
undertake things that would make him worthy of being called yours.
When Sancho heard his master's words, he began to cry with the greatest
tenderness of the world already declines:
-Sir, I do not know why your grace wants to undertake this so fearful
adventure: now it is night, here no one sees us, we may well twist the
walk and stray from danger, even if we don't drink for three days; and, well no
there are those who see us, less there will be those who notice us as cowards; the more, what
I have heard the priest of our place preach, that your grace is well
he knows that whoever seeks danger perishes in him; so it's not okay to tempt
to God undertaking such an outrageous fact, where one cannot escape but by
miracle; and those that heaven has done with your mercy are enough to free him
to be kept, as I was, and to win him, free and safe from
among as many enemies as accompanied the deceased. And, when all this fails
move or soften that hard heart, move it to think and believe that it is hardly
Your grace will be separated from here, when I, out of fear, give my soul to
who wants to take it. I left my land and left children and a wife for
come to serve at your mercy, believing to be worth more and not less; but how
the cudicia breaks the sack, it has torn my hopes, because when
more alive had them to reach that black and ill-fated island that so many
times your grace has promised me, I see that, in return and exchange for her,
now wants to leave in a place so remote from humane treatment. For a single
God, my lord, that such a mess is not given to me; and since not at all
may your grace desist from undertaking this date, fill it out, at the
less, until the morning; that, to what science shows me that
I learned when I was a pastor, there must not be three hours from here at dawn,
Because the mouth of the Horn is overhead, and it's midnight
on the line of the left arm.
`` How can you, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` see where that line goes, or
where is that mouth or that colodrillo that you say, if the night is so dark
that there does not appear to be any star in the whole sky?
"Yes," said Sancho, "but many eyes are afraid and he sees things
below ground, the higher up in the sky; since, for good
speech, it can be understood that there is little from here to the day.
"Whatever is missing," replied Don Quixote; that is not to be said by
me, now or at any time, what tears and prayers kept me from doing
what he owed to the gentleman's style; And so, I beg you, Sancho, to be quiet;
God, who has put my heart to undertake now this so unseen and
such a fearful adventure, he will be careful to look out for my health and to console
your sadness. What you have to do is tighten Rocinante's girths well and
stay here, that I will turn quickly, or alive or dead.
Seeing, then, Sancho the last resolution of his master and how little they were worth with
him his tears, advice and prayers, determined to take advantage of his
industry and make him wait until day, if he could; and so when
tightened the girths to the horse, beautifully and without being meaning, tied with the
halter of his donkey both feet to Rocinante, so that when he don
Quixote wanted to leave, he could not, because the horse could not move but
leaps and bounds. Seeing Sancho Panza the good success of his lie, he said:
-Hey, sir, that heaven, moved by my tears and prayers, has
ordered that Rocinante cannot move; and if you want to persist, and
spur, and dalle, will be to anger fortune and kick, as they say, against
the stinger.
Don Quixote despaired of this, and, even though he put his legs to the
horse, the less could move him; and, without realizing the ligature,
He had the good of calming down and waiting, or for dawn, or for Rocinante
wiggled, believing, no doubt, that it came from somewhere other than the
Sancho industry; and thus, he said:
-Well, that's right, Sancho, Rocinante can't move, I'm happy to
wait for the dawn to laugh, even if I cry what it takes for her to come.
`` We must not cry, '' answered Sancho, `` that I will entertain at your mercy
telling stories from here to the day, if it is no longer that you want to get off and
lie down to sleep a little on the green grass, in the use of gentlemen
walking, to be more rested when the day comes and point of
undertake this most unlikeable adventure that awaits you.
-What do you call down or what to sleep? said Don Quixote. Is it me, why
fortune, of those gentlemen who rest in danger? Sleep
you, who were born to sleep, or do what you want, that I will do what
See what else comes with my claim.
Don't be angry, my lord, 'replied Sancho,' I didn't say it.
therefore.
And, reaching to him, he put one hand on the front saddle and the other on the
another, so that he was embraced with his master's left thigh, without
dare to remove a finger from him: such was his fear of blows, that
still alternately sounded. Don Quixote told him to tell some
story to entertain him, as he had promised, to what Sancho said
what he would do if the fear of what he heard left him.
-But, with all that, I will endeavor to tell a story that, if
I succeed in telling and they are not at hand, it is the best of stories; and
be your mercy attentive to me, I am already beginning. «Once upon a time it was, the good
may it come for all, and evil, for those who seek it ... »And
may your grace warn, my lord, that the principle that the ancients
They gave their advice it was not like that, it was a sentence of Cato
Zonzorino, Roman, who says: "And evil, for whoever goes looking for it," that
comes here like a glove, so that your grace will stay and not
go to find evil nowhere, but we turn for another
path, because nobody forces us to follow this one, where so many fears
startle.
`` Follow your story, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` and the path we have to
continue leave the care to me.
"" I say, then, "Sancho continued," that in a place in Estremadura there was a
goat shepherd (I mean he kept goats), which shepherd or
Cabrerizo, as I say, from my story, his name was Lope Ruiz; and this Lope Ruiz
He was in love with a shepherdess named Torralba, who shepherdess
called Torralba was the daughter of a rich rancher, and this rich rancher ... »
`` If you disagree, tell your story, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` repeating
twice what you are saying, you will not finish in two days; say it next and
count it as a man of understanding, and if not, say nothing.
`` In the same way that I count it, '' answered Sancho, `` they are counted in my
earth all the advice, and I do not know how to tell it from another, nor is it good that
your grace ask me to make new uses.
"Say as you wish," answered Don Quixote; that, well luck wants that
I can't stop listening to you, he continues.
"So, my lord of my soul," Sancho continued, "that, as I already have
That said, this pastor was in love with Torralba, the shepherdess, who was a
plump girl, zahareña and threw something to manhood, because she had a few
whiskers, it seems that now I see it. "
-Then, did you meet her? Don Quixote said.
`` I did not know her, '' answered Sancho, `` but whoever told me this story
He said it was so true and true that he might as well, when he told
another, to affirm and swear that he had seen it all. «So, going days and
days coming, the devil, who does not sleep and that everything stinks, made
so that the love that the shepherd had for the shepherdess would become an omelet
and ill will; and the cause was, according to gossip, a certain amount
of celillos that she gave him, such that they crossed the line and reached the
forbidden; and it was so much that the shepherd hated her from then on that, for
not see her, she wanted to be absent from that land and go where her eyes did not
ever see. La Torralba, who was scorned by Lope, then wanted him
well, more than ever she had loved him. "
"That is a natural condition of women," said Don Quixote, "to disdain anyone who
love them and love those who hate them. Come on in, Sancho.
"" It happened, "said Sancho," that the pastor put his determination into action, and,
sheltering his goats, he set out through the fields of Estremadura, to
move to the kingdoms of Portugal. La Torralba, who knew it, went after him,
and followed him on foot and barefoot from afar, with a staff in hand and
some saddlebags around his neck, where he carried, according to fame, a piece of mirror
and another from a comb, and I don't know what little pot of clothes for the face; more,
whatever I wear, I don't want to get involved in finding out now,
I will only say that they say that the shepherd came with his cattle to cross the river
Guadiana, and at that time he was grown and almost out of mother, and by the
part that arrived there was no boat or ship, nor who passed him or his
gained from the other party, of which he was greatly distressed, because he saw that the
Torralba was coming very close and he had to give him a lot of grief with his
prayers and tears; But, he was looking so long that he saw a fisherman who had
next to it a ship, so small that only one
person and a goat; and, with all this, he spoke to him and arranged with him that
pass him and the three hundred goats he led. The fisherman entered the
ship, and a goat passed; He returned, and another passed; He came back again, and he went back to
pass another. " Have your mercy count on the goats that the fisherman goes
happening, because if one of the memory is lost, the story will end and
it will be possible to count more word from him. «I continue, then, and say that the
The landing stage on the other side was muddy and slippery, and
It took the fisherman a long time to come and go. With all this, he returned for
another goat, and another, and another ... »
`` Make sure you passed them all, '' said Don Quixote, `` don't go around and
Coming in a bad way, you won't finish spending them in a year.
-How many have passed until now? -said Sancho.
"What the hell do I know!" Don Quixote answered.
-That's what I said: that he had a good account. Well, by God, what has
finished the story, that there is no move forward.
-How can that be? Don Quixote answered. So of essence of the
history is to know the goats that have passed, through this, that if they err
one of the number can't you go on with the story?
"No sir, not at all," answered Sancho; because, just like me
I asked your mercy to tell me how many goats had passed and I
He replied that he did not know, at that very moment I left the
memory how much I had left to say, and faith that it was of great virtue and
happy.
"So," said Don Quixote, "is the story already over?"
"She is as finished as my mother," said Sancho.
`` Tell you really, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that you have told one of the most
new advice, story or story, that nobody could think of in the world; and
that such a way of telling it or leaving it, can never be seen or will have been seen in
all my life, although I did not expect anything else from your good speech; no more
I marvel, because perhaps these blows, which do not stop, must have you
understanding disturbed.
`` Anything can be, '' answered Sancho, `` but I know that in my story there is no
more to say: that there is finished do begins the error of the account of the
passage of the goats.
`` Finish no good where you want, '' said Don Quixote, `` and let's see if you can
move Rocinante.
He put his legs back on, and he again leaped and stayed:
so much was tied well.
In this, it seems to be, either that the morning cold was coming, or that Sancho
had eaten some lenitive things, or that it was a natural thing - which is what
what else should be believed-, it came to him in will and desire to do what
another could not do for him; but so much fear had entered
his heart, which did not dare to turn a black fingernail from his master. Well think
if he didn't do what he wanted, it wasn't possible either; and so, what he did, by
in good peace, it was to let go of the right hand, which was grasping the rear saddle,
with which, beautifully and without any rumor, the sliding loop was released
with which the breeches were held, without the help of any other, and, in
taking it off, they then came down and were like crickets. Behind this,
He lifted his shirt as best he could and flipped both buttocks into the air, not
they were very small. Done this - which he thought was the most he had to
do to get out of that terrible predicament and anguish-, another
major, which was that it seemed to him that he could not move without making a noise and
noise, and began to grit his teeth and shrug his shoulders, picking up
in itself the breath as much as it could; but, with all these diligences, it was
so miserable that, after all, he came to make a bit of noise, well
different from the one who scared him so much. Don Quixote heard him and said:
-What rumor is that, Sancho?
"I don't know, sir," he replied. Something new must be, that
adventures and misadventures never start small.
Again he tried his luck, and it succeeded so well that, without further noise or
uproar than the past, found itself free of the burden that so much grief
had given. But since Don Quixote had a sense of smell as alive as
the ear, and Sancho was so close and sewn with him that almost for
straight line the vapors rose upwards, it could not be excused that
some did not reach their noses; and, as soon as they arrived, when he
He went to the aid, squeezing them between his two fingers; and, with a somewhat twangy tone,
said:
-It seems to me, Sancho, that you are very afraid.
"Yes, I have," answered Sancho; but, how does your grace see it
now more than ever?
"In that now more than ever you smell, and not amber," answered Don Quixote.
`` It may well be, '' said Sancho, `` but it's not my fault, it's your fault.
Mercy, which brings me at odd hours and through these unaccustomed steps.
`` Go back three or four there, friend, '' said Don Quixote (all this without
remove the fingers from their noses) - and from here on have more account
with your person and with what you owe to mine; that the much conversation that
I have with you has engendered this contempt.
`` I'll bet, '' Sancho replied, `` that your grace thinks that I have done my
person something that should not.
"Worse is bad, friend Sancho," answered Don Quixote.
In these colloquia and others like them, the master and the groom spent the night. More,
Seeing Sancho that the morning was approaching further, he carefully detached
to Rocinante and tied his breeches. As Rocinante he was freed, although he
he was not at all spirited, it seems that he suffered, and began to give
spanked; because corvettes - with your forgiveness - I did not know how to do them. Seeing,
Well, Don Quixote, Rocinante was already moving, had it as a good sign, and believed
than it was that he undertake that fearful adventure.
At this point, the dawn was discovered and things seemed differently,
and Don Quixote saw that he was among some tall trees, that they were
chestnut trees, which make the shade very dark. He also felt that hitting did not
It ceased, but he did not see who could cause it; and thus, without further stopping, he did
feel Rocinante's spurs, and, again saying goodbye to Sancho,
commanded that three days be awaited for him there, the longest, as it has already been
I had said it; and that, if at the end of them he had not returned, he would have
It is true that God had been served that in that dangerous adventure he
his days are over. He returned to refer the message and embassy that had to
take his mistress Dulcinea on his behalf, and that, as far as pay was concerned
of his services, he was not sorry, because he had left his
testament before he left his place, where he would be gratified of
everything concerning his salary, rat by quantity, of the time that he had
served; But if God took him out of that danger safe and sound and without
Caution, the promised insula could be considered as very more than true.
Again Sancho began to cry, hearing again the pitiful reasons for
his good lord, and determined not to leave him until the last transit and end of
that business.
Destas tears and determination so honored of Sancho Panza the author draws
this story that must have been well born, and, at least, Christian
old. Whose feeling touched his master something, but not so much that
show some weakness; earlier, hiding as best he could, he began to
walk to the part where it seemed to him that the noise of the water and the
hitting was coming.
Sancho followed him on foot, leading, as usual, from the halter to his
donkey, perpetual companion of their prosperous and adverse fortunes; and,
having walked a good piece through those chestnut trees and trees
gloomy, they hit a little meadow that was made at the foot of some high rocks,
from which a huge blow of water was precipitating. At the foot of the
rocks, there were some poorly built houses that looked more like ruins of buildings
What houses, from which they noticed that the noise and roar came
of that hitting, which still did not stop.
Rocinante was agitated with the roar of the water and the blows, and,
Don Quixote calming him down, he gradually arrived at the houses,
entrusting himself with all his heart to his mistress, begging her that in that
fearful day and company favored him, and on the way he entrusted
also to God, who did not forget him. Sancho was not removed from his side, the
which lengthened as much as possible the neck and the view between the legs of
Rocinante, to see if he would already see what was so suspenseful and fearful for him.
Another hundred steps would be those that walked, when, turning from one end,
The same cause seemed discovered and patent, without being able to be another,
that horrible and for them frightful noise, so suspended and fearful
he had had them all night. And they were - if you have not, oh reader!
grief and anger - six fulling mallets, which with their alternate blows
that roar they formed.
When Don Quixote saw what it was, he was speechless and was astonished from top to bottom.
Sancho looked at him, and saw that his head was bent on his chest,
signs of being run. Don Quixote also looked at Sancho, and violated that
her cheeks were swollen and her mouth full of laughter, with obvious
signs of wanting to burst with her, and could not her melancholy so much with him
that, at the sight of Sancho, he might stop laughing; and, as Sancho saw that
his master had started, he released the prey so that he needed to
to clench the flanks with the fists, not to burst laughing. Four times
He calmed down, and many others returned to his laugh with the same impetus as before; from
which was already given to the devil Don Quixote, and more so when he heard him say, as
by snooping mode:
- «You must know, oh friend Sancho !, that I was born, wanting from heaven, in
This is our age of iron, to resurrect in it the golden age, or of gold. Me
I am the one for whom dangers are kept, great deeds,
brave facts ... »
And here he was repeating all or more reasons that Don Quixote said the
the first time they heard the fearful knocks.
So when Don Quixote saw that Sancho was making fun of him, he ran and got angry at
so much so that he raised the sandeel and set two sticks on it, such that, yes, as
received them on the back, received them on the head, was free from
pay him the salary, if it were not to his heirs. Seeing Sancho that he took out
so bad looks of his mockery, with fear that his master would not pass on
in them, with great humility he said:
-Your mercy be followed; that, by God, that I mock.
"Well, because you're making fun of me, I'm not making fun of it," replied Don Quixote. come
here, joyful gentleman: do they seem like you, if like these were decks of
they were another dangerous adventure, I had not shown the spirit that
was it suitable to undertake and hitchhike? Am I obliged, to bliss, to be,
as I am, gentleman, to know and distinguish the sounds and to know which ones are from
fulling or not? And more, it could be, as it is true, that I have not seen them in
my life, as you will have seen them, as a mean villain that you are, raised and
born among them. If not, make these six decks become
six jayans, and throw them on the beards one by one, or all together, and,
when I don't hit everyone upside down, make fun of me that
you would like.
"There is no more, my lord," replied Sancho, "that I confess that I have walked
something laughing too much. But tell me your grace, now that we are in
peace (even if God takes him out of all the adventures that happen to him so healthy and
except as you have taken this out), has it not been a laughing matter, and is it
count, the great fear that we have had? At least the one I had; what of
Your grace, I already know that you do not know him, nor do you know what fear or terror is.
`` I do not deny, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that what has happened to us is not something
worthy of laughter, but not worth telling; that they are not all people
so discreet that they know how to put things in order.
`` At least, '' answered Sancho, `` your grace knew how to put the
sandeel, aiming at my head, and hitting me on the back, thank God
and the diligence that I put in leaning. But boy, everything will come out in the
wash; that I have heard say: "That one loves you well, that makes you cry"; and
more, which usually the main gentlemen, after a bad word that they say to
a servant, then give him some hose; although I do not know what they usually give after
to have beaten him, if it is no longer that the knights errant give after
Island sticks or kingdoms on the mainland.
`` Maybe the dice could roll, '' said Don Quixote, `` that everything you say would come
to be true; and forgive the past, because you are discreet and you know that
first movements are not in the hands of man, and you are warned from here
forward on one thing, for you to abstain and report in speaking
too much with me; that in how many chivalric books I have read, which are
infinities, I have never found that no squire spoke so much to his lord
like you with yours. And in truth I really miss it, yours and mine:
yours, in that you estimate me in little; mine, in that I do not allow myself to be esteemed in more. Yes,
that Gandalín, squire of Amadís de Gaula, count was from the Firme island; and
It is read of him who always spoke to his master with his cap in his hand,
head bowed and body bent more turquoise. Well what shall we say
of Gasabal, don Galaor's squire, who was so quiet that, to
declare the excellence of his wonderful silence, only once did he
name his name in all that great as true history? From
All that I have said you have to infer, Sancho, that it is necessary to do
Difference from master to waiter, from lord to servant and from knight to squire. A) Yes
that, from now on, we must treat each other with more respect, without giving ourselves
cordelejo, because, in any way that I get angry with you, it must be
bad for the pitcher. The merits and benefits that I have promised you
they will arrive in time; and if they do not arrive, the salary, at least, has not
lose, as I have already told you.
-It is good what your grace says -said Sancho-, but I would like to know,
just in case the time of the mercedes did not come and it was necessary to go
salary, how much a squire earned from a knight errant in
those times, and if they agreed for months, or days, as pawns of
bricklayer.
`` I do not believe, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that such squires never
they were at salary, but at mercy. And if I have now pointed to you
In the closed will that I left at home, it was because of what could happen;
I still do not know how it proves in these calamitous times of ours the
cavalry, and I would not want my soul to suffer for a few things in the other
world. Because I want you to know, Sancho, that there is no more
dangerous than adventurers.
`` That's true, '' said Sancho, `` because only the noise of the mallets of a fulling mill
could stir and disturb the heart of such a brave walker
adventurer as is your mercy. But you may well be sure that
here ahead, I do not spread my lips to make grace of the things of
your mercy, if it were not to honor him, as my natural lord and master.
"That way," replied Don Quixote, "you will live on the face of the earth;"
because, after parents, masters must be respected as if
were.
Chapter XXI. Which deals with the high adventure and rich profit of the helmet of
Mambrino, with other things happened to our invincible knight
In this, it began to rain a little, and Sancho would like them to enter the
mill of the fulling mills; but Don Quixote had charged them with such abhorrence,
for the heavy mockery, which in no way wanted to enter inside; and so,
twisting the way to the right hand, they found another like the one they had
worn the day before.
Little by little, Don Quixote discovered a man on horseback, who was carrying
head of a thing that glittered as if it were gold, and yet he barely
he had seen, when he turned to Sancho and said:
-It seems to me, Sancho, that there is no saying that is not true, because they are all
sentences drawn from the same experience, mother of all sciences,
especially the one that says: "Where one door closes, another opens."
Say it because if last night luck closed the door of which
We were looking, fooling ourselves with the fulling mills, now it opens us wide
another, for another better and more certain adventure; What if I do not succeed in entering
For her, it will be my fault, without being able to give it to the little news of
fullers nor in the darkness of the night. I say this because, if I am not mistaken,
towards us comes one who wears on his head the helmet of Mambrino,
About me taking the oath you know
`` Take a good look at what you say, and what you do better, '' said Sancho.
that I would not want other fullers to be that they had just fulfilled us and
pounding sense.
"Fuck the devil for a man!" replied Don Quixote. What goes from helmet to
fullers?
"I don't know anything," answered Sancho; more, in faith that if I could talk so much
as he used to, that perhaps he would give such reasons that Your Grace would see that
he was deceiving in what he says.
"How can I deceive myself in what I say, scrupulous traitor?" -said don
Quixote-. Tell me, don't you see that gentleman who is coming towards us, on a
rocked white horse, that wears a golden helmet on its head?
`` What I see and I am aware of, '' answered Sancho, `` is nothing but a man on a
brown ass, like mine, that carries a glittering thing on its head.
"Well, that is Mambrino's helmet," said Don Quixote. Step aside
and leave me with him alone: ​​you will see how without speaking a word, to save
time, I conclude this adventure and it remains for me the helmet that I have
wanted.
"I am careful to move away," replied Sancho, "God willing,
around to say, let it be oregano, and not fullers.
-I have already told you, brother, that you do not lie to me, not even I think, plus that of the
fullers, "said Don Quixote; What a vote ..., and I do not say more, that you beat the
soul.
Sancho was silent, afraid that his master would not fulfill the vow he had
cast, round as a ball.
It is, then, the case that the helmet, and the horse and knight that Don Quixote
I saw, it was this: that in that contour there were two places, one so small
that neither had a pharmacy nor a barber, and the other, who was together, yes; and
Thus, the eldest barber served the youngest, in which he needed a
sick of bleeding and another of growing a beard, for which the
barber, and brought a basin of hoe; and as luck would have it that, at the same time
came, it began to rain, and, because his hat did not get stained, he must
if new, he put the basin on his head; and since it was clean,
from half a league it shone. It came on a brown ass, as Sancho said,
and this was the occasion that Don Quixote thought it was a rolled white horse, and
knight, and golden helmet; that all the things that I saw, with much
easily accommodated his raving cavalry and mischievous
thoughts. And when he saw the poor gentleman come close, without
put himself with him in reasons, at full speed Rocinante entered him with the
low sandeel, carrying the intention of passing him from part to part; more when to
he arrived, without stopping the fury of his career, he said:
-Defend yourself, captive creature, or give me of your will what with
so much reason is owed to me!
The barber, who, so without thinking or fear, saw that ghost coming
on himself, he had no other choice, to be able to guard against the blow of the spear,
if it was not letting himself fall from the ass down; and had not touched the ground, when
He got up lighter than a deer and began to run across that plain, which
the wind will not reach him. He left the basin on the ground, with which he
Don Quixote contented, and said that the pagan had been discreet and that
had imitated the beaver, which, seeing itself harassed by hunters,
taraza and harp with teeth that for which he, by different natural,
he knows he is being persecuted. He commanded Sancho to raise his helmet, which,
taking it in his hands, he said:
- By God, that the basin is good and that it is worth a real of eight as a
maravedí.
And, giving it to his master, he then put it on his head, surrounding a
part and another, looking for the lace; and, as he was not found, he said:
Undoubtedly the heathen, to whose measure this famous trap was first forged,
He must have had a very large head, and the worst of it is that he is missing half.
When Sancho heard the caled basin call, he could not laugh; more
His master's anger came to his mind, and he fell silent in the middle of it.
-What are you laughing at, Sancho? Don Quixote said.
`` I laugh, '' he replied, `` to consider the great head that the heathen had
owner of this hat, which does not look like anything but a barber's basin.
-Do you know what I imagine, Sancho? May this famous piece wear this enchanted helmet,
by some strange accident, it must have come into the hands of someone who did not know
nor estimate its value, and, without knowing what it was doing, seeing it of pure gold,
must have melted the other half to take advantage of the price, and the other
half made this one, which looks like a barber's basin, as you say. But, be it
whatever; that for me that I know her, her transmutation is irrelevant; that
I will dress it in the first place where there is a blacksmith, and luckily not
give him an advantage, not even reach him, the one made and forged by the god of
smithies for the god of battles; and, in the meantime, I will bring her
as it could, that something is better than nothing; the more, how good it will be
enough to defend myself from a stone.
`` That will be, '' said Sancho, `` if it is not thrown with a slingshot, as they were thrown in the
fight of the two armies, when they crossed him at your mercy the
grindstones and they broke the cruet where that blessed concoction came
it made me throw up the roasts.
-I am not very sorry for having lost him, you already know, Sancho -said Don
Quixote-, I have the recipe in memory.
`` I have it too, '' answered Sancho, `` but if I did not
I will try more in my life, here is my time. The more that I do not intend to wear
on the occasion of having needed him, because I plan to keep myself with all my five
senses of being ferido nor of ferir to anybody. Of being again
I say nothing, that such misfortunes can be prevented badly, and
If they come, you have to do nothing but shrug your shoulders, stop the
breath, close your eyes and let yourself go where luck and the blanket
I will carry.
`` You are a bad Christian, Sancho, '' Don Quixote said, hearing this, `` because you never
you forget the injury they have once done to you; well know what is breasts
noble and generous to ignore childish things. What foot did you get lame, what
broken rib, what broken head, so that you don't forget that mockery?
That, when the thing was in a hurry, it was mockery and pastime; what if I don't understand
So, I would have already returned there and done more damage than
the one the Greeks did for the stolen Elena. Which, if it were in this
time, or my Dulcinea was in it, I could be sure I had no
as much fame as beautiful as it has.
And here he took a breath, and put him in the clouds. And Sancho said:
-It passed for ridicule, because revenge cannot really happen; but i know about
what quality were the truths and teasing, and I also know that I will not fall
of memory, as they will never be taken off their backs. But, leaving this
apart, your grace tell me what we will do with this black-and-white horse, that
It looks like a brown ass, which left here forsaken that Martino that your
mercy brought down; who, according to him, put his feet in powder and took those of
Villadiego has never had a chance to come back for him; and for my beards,
if the black is not good!
`` I am never accustomed, '' said Don Quixote, `` to strip those I win, nor is it use
cavalry to take away their horses and leave them on foot, if it were not
the victor would have lost his in the quarrel; that, in that case,
It is lawful to take that of the vanquished, as cattle in lawful warfare. So,
Sancho, leave that horse, or ass, or whatever you want it to be, what, like
his owner sees us elongated from here, he will come back for him.
`` God knows if I wanted to take you, '' replied Sancho, `` or at least
with this one of mine, which doesn't seem so good to me. Truly they are narrow
the laws of chivalry, since they do not tend to allow an ass to be exchanged for
other; And I would like to know if I could even barter the rigging.
"I am not quite certain about that," answered Don Quixote; and, when in doubt,
until I am better informed, I say that you trade them, if you have them
extreme need.
`` It is so extreme, '' answered Sancho, `` that if they were for myself, I would not
I would have needed them more.
And then, empowered with that license, he made mutatio caparum and put his
donkey with a thousand niceties, leaving him improved in third and fifth.
This done, they had lunch from the leftovers of the real that they despoiled from the hemlock,
they drank from the water of the brook of the fullers, without turning their faces to look at them:
such was their abhorrence for the fear in which they had
Market Stall.
So when their anger and even their malice were cut off, they mounted their horses, and, without
take a certain path, being very knight-errant not to take
none true, they began to walk where the will of Rocinante
wanted, that he took after him his master's, and even that of the donkey, who always
she followed him wherever he led, in good love and company. With everything
this, they returned to the royal road and continued along it at random, without another
any design.
As he walked thus, Sancho said to his master:
"Sir, will your grace give me leave to spare a little with him?"
That, after he gave me that harsh commandment of silence, I have been
rotten more than four things in my stomach, and only one that I now have in
the tip of the tongue would not want it to go wrong.
`` Say it, '' said Don Quixote, `` and be brief in your reasoning, that there is none
tasty if it is long.
`` So I say, sir, '' answered Sancho, `` that, from a few days to this part,
I have considered how little you earn and farm from looking for these
adventures that your grace seeks through these deserts and crossroads of
roads, where, as the most dangerous ones expire and end, there is no one
see or know them; and thus, they have to remain in perpetual silence, and in
prejudice to the intention of your mercy and what they deserve. AND
thus, it seems to me that it would be better, except the best opinion of your grace,
that we go to serve some emperor, or another great prince who
have any war, in whose service your mercy shows the value of your
person, his great strengths and greater understanding; what, seen this from
Lord whom we serve, by force has to remunerate us, each one
according to their merits, and there will be no shortage of those who will write down the deeds of
your mercy, for perpetual memory. I don't say anything about mine, well no
They have to go out of the squadron limits; although I know how to say that, if it is used in
cavalry to write feats of squires, which I do not think are to be
keep mine between the lines.
"You are not saying wrong, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; more, before it comes to
that term, it is necessary to walk through the world, as in approval, seeking
the adventures, so that, finishing some, he gets a name and fame such that,
when he goes to the court of some great monarch, be it the knight
known for his works; and that, as soon as the boys have seen him enter
through the city gate, when everyone follows and surrounds him, shouting,
saying: '' This is the Knight of the Sun '', or of the Serpent, or of another
any insignia, under which he would have finished great feats. ''East
It is - they will say - the one who defeated the gigantic Brocabruno of the
Great strength; the one who disenchanted the Great Mamluk of Persia of the long
enchantment in which he had been almost nine hundred years. '' So, hand in hand
in hand, they will proclaim your deeds, and then, to the uproar of the boys
and the rest of the people, the king of
that kingdom, and as he sees the knight, knowing him by arms or by
the company of the shield, necessarily has to say: '' Ea, sus! Get out my
Gentlemen, how many in my court are, to receive the flower of the
cavalry, here he comes! '' At whose command they will all go out, and
He will reach the middle of the stairs, and he will hug you very tightly, and
he will give you peace by kissing him on the face; and then lead you by the hand to
chamber of the lady queen, where the knight will find her with the infanta,
her daughter, who must be one of the most beautiful and accomplished maidens who, in
Much of what has been discovered on earth can hardly be found.
It will happen after this, then on the continent, that she sets her eyes on the
knight and he in the della, and each one seems to another something more divine than
human; and, without knowing how or how not, they must be imprisoned and bound in
the intricate love network, and with great concern in their hearts for not knowing
how they have to fable to discover their desires and feelings. From there
they will take you, no doubt, to some room of the palace, richly decorated,
where, having taken away his weapons, they will bring him a rich scarlet cloak
with which to cover; and although it seemed armed, it must seem so good and better
in farseto. When night comes, he will dine with the king, queen and infanta, where
will never take his eyes off her, peering at her from those around her, and she
will do the same with the same sagacity, because, as I have said, it is very
discreet maid. Get up with the tables, and will enter at the wrong time by the
door of the living room an ugly little dwarf with a beautiful owner, who, between
two giants, behind the dwarf comes, with a certain adventure, made by a
ancient wise, that the one who will finish it will be considered the best gentleman
of the world. The king will then order that all who are present
try, and no one will give it an end and a summit but the guest knight, in much
for her fame, of which the Infanta will be very happy, and she will be
happy and paid too, for having put and placed her thoughts in
so high part. And the good thing is that this king, or prince, or whatever he is, has
a very close war with another as powerful as himself, and the guest knight
asks you (after a few days in court) for a license to
go to serve him in that war said. The king will give it to him in a very good mood,
and the gentleman will politely kiss his hands for the mercy that he faces. AND
That night the Infanta will say goodbye to his mistress through the bars of a
garden, which falls into the room where she sleeps, for which other
she had fabled it many times, being a mediator and knowing all about a
maiden whom the infanta much trusted. He will sigh, faint
she, the maiden will bring water, she will stay a lot because morning is coming, and
he would not want them discovered, for the honor of his mistress. Finally,
The princess will come to her senses and give her white hands to the knight through the gate,
who will kiss them a thousand and a thousand times and bathe them in tears. Will remain
agreed between the two in the way that their good or
bad events, and the princess will beg him to stop as little as possible;
promise it to him with many oaths; turn to kiss his hands, and
say goodbye with so much feeling that your life will not be over. Go
from there to your room, lie down on your bed, you cannot sleep from the pain
departure, get up early in the morning, go to say goodbye to the king and queen
and of the infanta; tell him, having said goodbye to both, that the lady
Infanta is ill-disposed and unable to receive a visit; he thinks
gentleman who is sorry for his departure, pierce his heart, and
little of not giving a clear indication of his grief. There is the dividing maiden
ahead, halo to notice everything, go say it to your lady, who receives it
with tears and tells him that one of the greatest sorrows he has is not knowing
who is his knight, and if he is of the lineage of kings or not; secure her
maiden who cannot fit as much courtesy, kindness and bravery as that of
his knight but in real and grave subject; Comfort the careful one with this;
tries to console himself, not to give his parents a bad indication of himself, and, after
two days, it goes out in public. The knight is gone: fight in the war,
defeat the king's enemy, win many cities, triumph in many battles,
He goes back to court, he sees his wife where he usually does, ask him to ask her
to his father by wife in payment of his services. The king does not want to give it to him,
because he doesn't know who he is; but, with all this, or stolen or any other
luckily it is, the infanta becomes his wife and his father comes to
have great luck, because he came to find out that such a gentleman is
son of a brave king of I do not know what kingdom, because I believe that he should not
be on the map. The father dies, the infanta inherits, the king remains
gentleman in two words. Here comes in then doing favors to his squire
and to all those who helped him rise to such high status: home to his
squire with a maiden of the infanta, who will undoubtedly be the one who was
third in her love affairs, who is the daughter of a very important duke.
"That is what I ask, and straight bars," said Sancho; I stick to that, because everything,
to the letter, it must happen by your mercy, calling himself the
Knight of the Sad Figure.
`` Do not doubt it, Sancho, '' replied Don Quixote, `` because in the same way and because of the
The same steps that I have counted rise and the knights errant have risen
to be kings and emperors. We only need to look at what king of Christians
or of the pagans have war and have a beautiful daughter; but there will be time for
think this, well, as I have told you, first you have to become famous for
other parties to go to court. I also lack something else; that,
in case a king is found with war and with a beautiful daughter, and that I have
gained incredible fame throughout the universe, I do not know how it could be found
that I be of the lineage of kings, or, at least, second cousin of emperor;
because the king will not want me to give his daughter as a wife if he is not first very
aware of this, although my famous deeds deserve it more. So for
this lack, I fear losing what my arm has well deserved. Well it's true
that I am the son of a known lot, of possession and ownership and of
earn five hundred salaries; and it could be that the wise man who wrote my
history demarcated my kinship and descent in such a way that I
found fifth or sixth grandson of king. Because I let you know, Sancho, what is there
two forms of lineages in the world: ones that bring and tear down their
descent of princes and monarchs, to whom time has gradually
undone, and they have ended up in a point, like a pyramid turned upside down; others
They had the beginning of low people, and they go up from grade to grade, until
become great lords. So there is the difference in that some
they were, who are no longer, and others are, who no longer were; and it could be me
of these that, after finding out, would have been my great and
famous, with which the king, my father-in-law, who had to
be. And when not, the Infanta has to love me so that, despite her
Father, although he clearly knows that I am the son of an azacan, he has to admit
by lord and by husband; and if not, here the snook enters and takes it where else
please give me; that time or death will end the anger of their
parents.
-There is also a good place -said Sancho- what some heartless people say: "No
ask of degree what you can take by force "; although it is better to say:
"It is better to jump from the kill than I pray from good men." Say it because if the
Mr. King, father-in-law of your mercy, he does not want to dominate
my lady the infanta, there is nothing but, as your grace says, snook and
trasponella. But there is the harm that, as long as peace is made and
peacefully enjoy the kingdom, the poor squire will be able to be to tooth in
this of the mercedes. If she is no longer that third maiden, she is to be her
woman, he goes out with the infanta, and he spends his bad luck with her, until
may heaven order something else; because it might as well, I think, of course
give it to him his lord as a ligitimate wife.
"No one can take that away," said Don Quixote.
`` Well, whatever it is, '' answered Sancho, `` we cannot but entrust ourselves to God, and
letting luck run where it best leads.
`` May God do it, '' answered Don Quixote, `` as I wish, and you, Sancho, have
need; and ruin is he who is ruin.
`` Let it be for God, '' said Sancho, `` that I am an old Christian, and to be a count
this is enough for me.
"And you still have plenty," said Don Quixote; And when you weren't, I was doing nothing at
case, because, being the king, I can give you nobility, without
buy or serve me with anything. Because, in becoming a count, catch yourself there
gentleman, and whatever they say; that in good faith they have to call you
Your Honor, it is too bad for you.
-And rides that I would not know how to authorize the litado! -said Sancho.
"Dictated, you have to say, not litado," said his master.
"Let it be," answered Sancho Panza. I say that he would know how to accommodate,
because, for my life, that I was once a member of a brotherhood, and that I
the clothes of the muñidor fit so well, that everyone said that he had a presence
to be able to be prioste of the same brotherhood. Well, what will it be when I
put a ducal robe on my back, or dress myself in gold and pearls, to wear
foreign count? For me, they have to come see me from a hundred leagues.
`` You will seem fine, '' said Don Quixote, `` but it will be necessary for you to shave your
beards often; which, depending on how thick, stormy and bad
on, if you do not shave them with a razor, every two days at least, within
shotgun will be seen to see what you are.
`` What is there more, '' said Sancho, `` but to take a barber and have a salaryman in
home? And even, if necessary, I will make him walk after me, as a groom
big.
"Well, how do you know," asked Don Quixote, "that the great ones are behind
from himself to his grooms?
`` I'll tell you, '' answered Sancho, `` I spent a month at the
court, and there I saw that, walking a very small man, who said he was
very large, a man followed him on horseback at all the turns he made, which
it just looked like it was his tail. I asked how that man did not know
He hung out with the other, but was always after him. They answered me that
He was her groom, and it was the use of the great to bring such men after them.
Since then I know it so well that I have never forgotten it.
"I say you're right," said Don Quixote, "and that way you can take your
Barber; that the uses did not all come together, nor were they invented together, and
you can be the first earl to bring his barber after him; and it is still from
more confidence to make a beard than to saddle a horse.
"Keep that of the barber in my charge," said Sancho, "and of your mercy
try to become king and make me count.
"It will be," answered Don Quixote.
And, looking up, he saw what will be said in the next chapter.
Chapter XXII. Of the freedom that Don Quixote gave to many unfortunates who,
bad of their degree, they took them where they did not want to go
Cide Hamete Benengeli, an Arabic and La Mancha author, tells in this very serious,
bombastic, minimal, sweet and imagined story that, after the
famous Don Quixote de la Mancha and Sancho Panza, his squire, passed
those reasons that are referred to at the end of chapter twenty-one,
that Don Quixote raised his eyes and saw that the way he was leading was coming
up to twelve men on foot, strung, like beads, on a great chain of
iron by their necks, and all with handcuffs. They came anxiety
with them two men on horseback and two on foot; those on horseback, with
shotguns with wheels, and those on foot, with darts and swords; and that as well as
Sancho Panza saw them, said:
-This is a chain of galley slaves, forced people of the king, who go to the galleys.
-How forced people? asked Don Quixote. Is it possible for the king to do
force no people?
`` I'm not saying that, '' answered Sancho, `` but they are people who, for their crimes, go
condemned to serve the king in the galleys by force.
`` In resolution, '' replied Don Quixote, `` whatever that may be, these people,
Although they carry them, they go by force, and not of their will.
"That's right," Sancho said.
"Well, unfortunately," said his master, "here fits the execution of my trade:
lose strength and help and go to the wretched.
"Let your grace warn," said Sancho, "that justice, which is the same
king, does not force or injure such people, but punishes them in
penalty for their crimes.
At this, the chain of galley slaves arrived, and Don Quixote, with very courteous
reasons, he asked those who were in his guard to be served as informal and
Decille the cause, or causes, why those people lead in that way.
One of the horse guards replied that they were galley slaves, people of His
Majesty that he went to galleys, and that there was nothing more to say, nor did he have more
what to know.
`` With all that, '' replied Don Quixote, `` I would like to know about each of them in
particular the cause of his misfortune.
He added to these other such and so restrained reasons, to move them to
If they said what he wanted, the other horse guard said to him:
-Although we keep here the record and the faith of the sentences of each one
unfortunate friends, this is not the time to stop them from
read them; your mercy arrive and ask them themselves, that they
They will say it if they want, that they will, because they are people who enjoy
do and say mischief.
With this license, that Don Quixote took even if it was not given to him,
came to the chain, and asked the first one why he was so sinful
bad guise. He replied that because he was in love he went that way.
-That's why no more? replied Don Quixote. Well, if for lovers they start
galleys, days ago I could be rowing in them.
"They are not the loves as your grace thinks," said the galley slave;
that mine was that I loved a straining basket so much, crammed with
white clothes, that I hugged with me so tightly that, not to take it off my
justice by force, even until now I would not have left it of my will.
It was fragrant, there was no place of torment; the cause was concluded,
they accommodated my back with a hundred, and in addition three precise of
gurapas, and the work was finished.
-What are gurapas? asked Don Quixote.
"Gurapas are galleys," replied the galley slave.
Who was a young man up to the age of twenty-four, and said he was
native of Piedrahíta. Don Quixote asked the same thing to the second, who did not
He answered a word, as he went from sad and malenconic; but he answered for him
the first, and said:
"This one, sir, is for a canary;" I mean, by musician and singer.
"Well, how," repeated Don Quixote, "for musicians and singers they also go to
galleys?
`` Yes, sir, '' replied the galley slave, `` there is nothing worse than singing in the
craving.
`` Before, I have heard it said, '' said Don Quixote, `` that whoever sings his ills
scares.
`` Here it is the other way around, '' said the galley slave, `` that whoever sings once cries the whole
life.
"I don't understand it," said Don Quixote.
But one of the guards said to him:
-Mr. Knight, to sing in anxiety it is said, among these non-holy people,
confess in torment. This sinner was tormented and confessed his
crime, which was to be a horse thief, which is to be a thief of beasts, and, for having
confessed, they sentenced him to galleys for six years, in addition to two hundred lashes
that he already carries on his back. And he is always thoughtful and sad, because
other thieves who remain there and here they go mistreat and annihilate him, and
They mock and have little, because he confessed and did not have the courage to say no.
Because they say that so many letters have a no as a yes, and that is fed up
fortune has a delinquent, whose life or death is on his tongue, and
not in that of witnesses and evidence; and for me I have to not go very out
on the way.
"And I understand it that way," answered Don Quixote.
Who, going to the third, asked what the others; which, of
promptly and with great carelessness, he answered and said:
-I go for five years to the Gurapa ladies for missing ten ducats.
`` I will gladly give twenty, '' said Don Quixote, `` to spare you
grief.
`` It seems to me, '' replied the galley slave, `` as one who has money in the middle of the
gulf and is starving, with nowhere to buy what
necessary. Say it because if in due time I had those twenty ducats that
your grace now offers me, I would have anointed with them the hanger of the
notary public and enlivened the attorney's wit, so that today he would see me
in the middle of the Plaza de Zocodover, in Toledo, and not on this road,
gripped like a greyhound; but God is great: patience and enough.
Don Quixote came into the room, who was a man with a venerable face with a
white beard that passed from his chest; which, hearing himself ask the cause
because there he was coming, he began to cry and did not answer a word; plus the fifth
condemned served as his tongue, and said:
-This honorable man goes to galleys for four years, having walked the
accustomed dressed in pomp and on horseback.
`` That's right, '' said Sancho Panza, `` as it seems to me, to have gone out to the
shame.
"That is so," replied the galley slave; and the fault that they gave him this penalty is for
having been a runner by ear, and even of the whole body. Indeed, I want
to say that this gentleman is going for a pimp, and for also having his tips
and a sorcerer's necklace.
"Unless you added those tips and necklace," said Don Quixote,
only the clean pimp, he did not deserve to go rowing in the galleys,
but to mandallas and to be general dellas; because it is not like that
job of pimp, which is the job of discreet and very necessary in the
a well-ordered republic, and that it should be exercised only by very well-known people
born; and there still had to be an overseer and examiner of such, as there is
of the other trades, with a known and deputed number, such as brokers of
slice; and in this way many evils that are caused by walking would be excused
this trade and exercise among idiotic people with little understanding, such as
They are little women from little more to less, page boys and scoundrels of a few years and
of little experience, who, at the most necessary occasion and when it is necessary
give a trace that matters, the crumbs spread between their mouth and hand and
they don't know what his right hand is. I would like to go ahead and give the reasons
because it was convenient to choose those who in the republic had to have
so necessary trade, but it is not the right place for it: one day
I will tell who can provide and remedy it. I'm just saying now that it's worth it
has caused me to see these white gray hairs and this venerable face in so many
Fatigue, as a pimp, has been taken from me by the adjunct of being a sorcerer; although
I know well that there are no spells in the world that can move and force the
will, as some simple think; that our will is free, and not
There is no herb or charm that forces it. What some little women usually do
simple and some mischievous miscreants is some mixes and poisons with which
they drive men crazy, implying that they have the strength to do
wanting well, being, as I say, an impossible thing to force the will.
`` Yes, '' said the good old man, `` and indeed, sir, that in the sorcerer's
that I was not to blame; As for the pimp, I couldn't deny it. But i never thought
what was wrong with it: that all my intention was that everyone
relax and live in peace and quiet, without quarrels or sorrows; But not me
This good wish took advantage of nothing to stop going where I do not expect to return,
as the years load me and a bad urine that I carry, that does not leave me
rest for a while.
And here he returned to his crying, as of first; and Sancho felt so much compassion,
that he took a real of four from the bosom and gave him alms.
Don Quixote came forward, and asked another his crime, who replied
with not less, but with much more gallantry than the past:
-I go here because I teased too much with two first cousins ​​of mine, and
with two other sisters who weren't mine; finally, so much I teased with
all, which resulted from the mockery to grow the family, so intricately that
there is no devil to declare it. He tried everything on me, there was no favor, I had no money,
I was on the verge of losing the tragaderos, they sentenced me to galleys for six
years, I agreed: punishment is my fault; I am a boy: last life, what with
her everything is achieved. If your grace, sir knight, carry anything
with which to help these poor people, God will repay them in heaven, and
we will be careful on earth to pray to God in our
prayers for the life and health of your grace, may it be so long and so
good as his good looks deserve.
He was in the habit of a student, and one of the guards said that he was very
great talkative and very gentle latin.
After all these, came a very good-looking man, aged thirty
years, but when looking he put one eye into the other a little. Came
tied differently than the others, because he had a chain at his foot, so
large that tied it all over the body, and two rings to the throat, the
one in the chain, and the other one of what they call guardaamigo or piedeamigo, of
which descended two irons that reached the waist, in which were
They were holding two handcuffs, where he carried his hands, closed with a thick padlock,
so that neither with his hands could reach his mouth, nor could he lower the
head to reach hands. Don Quixote asked how that man was doing
with so many prisons more than the others. The guard answered him because he had
that one alone more crimes than all the others put together, and that he was so daring and
such a great scoundrel that, although they carried him that way, they were not
safe from him, but feared that they would flee.
"What crimes can he have," said Don Quixote, "if they have not been worth more pain
let him go to the galleys?
"It goes for ten years," replied the guard, "which is like cevil death." I dont know
want to know more, but this good man is the famous Ginés from
Pasamonte, which by another name is called Ginesillo de Parapilla.
`` Senor Commissar, '' said the galley slave then, `` go away little by little, and don't
let's go now to define names and nicknames. Ginés my name is and no
Ginesillo, and Pasamonte is my lineage, and not Parapilla, as voacé says; and
each one goes around the circle, and will do little.
`` Speak less tone, '' replied the commissioner, `` mister thief of more than
brand, if you don't want me to shut you up, it is bad that it weighs you down.
`` It seems well, '' replied the galley slave, `` that man goes as God is served,
but someday someone will know if my name is Ginesillo de Parapilla or not.
"Well, don't they call you a liar, you liar?" -said the guard.
`` Yes, they do call, '' Ginés replied, `` but I'll make sure they don't call me, or
I would peel where I say between my teeth. Sir knight, if you have something to
give us, give it to us now, and go with God, who is already angry with so much wanting to know
other people's lives; and if mine wants to know, know that I am Ginés de Pasamonte,
whose life is written by these thumbs.
`` He's telling the truth, '' said the commissioner, `` that he himself has written his story, that
there is no more, and he pawns the book in jail for two hundred reais.
"And I am going to remove it," said Ginés, "if there were only two hundred ducats left."
-Is it that good? Don Quixote said.
"It's so good," Ginés replied, "what a bad year for Lazarillo de Tormes and for
all those of that genre have been or will be written. What i know
to say to voacé is that it deals with truths, and that they are so beautiful and so
donosas that there can be no lies that are equal to him.
-And how is the book titled? asked Don Quixote.
"The life of Ginés de Pasamonte," he answered himself.
-And is it finished? asked Don Quixote.
"How can it be finished," he answered, "if my life is not finished yet?"
What is written is from my birth to the point that the latter
I have been thrown into galleys once.
-Then, have you been in them again? Don Quixote said.
-To serve God and the king, I have been there again for four years, and I know what
He knows the sponge cake and the corbacho -answered Ginés-; and it does not weigh me much to go
to them, because there I will have a place to finish my book, I have many
things to say, and in the galleys of Spain there is more tranquility than he who
it would be necessary, although it is not necessary much more for what I have of
write, because I know it in chorus.
"You seem able," said Don Quixote.
"And unfortunate," replied Ginés; because misfortunes always haunt the
good wit.
"They are after the miscreants," said the commissioner.
`` I have already told you, Commissioner, '' said Pasamonte, `` to leave little by
little, that those gentlemen did not give him that rod to mistreat the
Poor here we go, but to guide us and take us where His
Majesty rules. If not, for the life of ...! Enough !, it could be that
someday the stains that were made in the sale would come out in the laundry; and
everyone shut up, and live well, and speak better and let's walk, which is already
much gloating this one.
The commissioner raised his wand to give Pasamonte in response to his
threats, but Don Quixote got in the way and begged him not to mistreat him,
because it was not much that the person who had his hands so tied had some
both loose the tongue. And, turning to everyone in the chain, he said:
-Of everything you have told me, dear brothers, I have found out
that, although they have punished you for your faults, the penalties that you are going to
suffering does not give you much pleasure, and that you go to them very reluctantly and very
against your will; and that it could be that the little spirit that he had
In the torment, the lack of money from each other, the little favor of the other and,
finally, the twisted judgment of the judge, would have been the cause of your
perdition and of not having come out with the justice that on your part
you had. All of which is represented to me now in memory in a way
what is telling me, persuading and even forcing me to show with you
the effect so that heaven threw me into the world, and made me profess in it the
order of chivalry that I profess, and the vow that I made in it to favor
the needy and oppressed of the elderly. But, because I know that one of the
parts of prudence is that what can be done for good is not done for
wrong, I want to ask these guardian and commissioner gentlemen to be served as
untie you and let you go in peace, that there will be others who serve the king in
best occasions; because it seems hard to me to make slaves whom God
and nature set free. The more, gentlemen guards, "added Don Quixote,"
that these poor have not committed anything against you. There it is every
one with his sin; God is in heaven, who does not neglect to punish the
bad or rewarding the good, and it is not good for honest men to be
executioners of other men, leaving them nothing in it. I ask this with this
meekness and calm, because if you fulfill it, I have something to thank you for;
and, when in degree you do not do it, this spear and this sword, with the value of
my arm, they will make you do it by force.
-Donose nonsense! -the commissioner answered- Well there is the grace with which
has been out for a while! The king's forces want us to leave him, like
if we had the authority to release them or he had the authority to send it to us!
Go your grace, sir, norabuena, your way forward, and straighten
that potty that he carries on his head, and don't go looking for three feet for the cat.
-You are the cat, and the time, and the scoundrel! Don Quixote answered.
And, saying and doing, he attacked him so quickly that, without having
Instead of putting himself in defense, he found him on the ground, badly wounded
released; And tell him well, this was the one with the shotgun. The other guards
they were stunned and suspended from the unexpected event; but,
Returning to themselves, the horsemen, and the horsemen, laid hands on their swords.
on foot to their darts, and attacked Don Quixote, who with great calm
I was waiting; and, without a doubt, he would have a bad time if the galley slaves, seeing the occasion
that was offered to them to achieve freedom, they did not seek it, seeking
break the chain where they came strung. It was the revolt so that the
guards, now for going to the galley slaves, who were unleashed, now for attacking
Don Quixote, who attacked them, did nothing that was helpful.
Sancho, for his part, helped the ease of Ginés de Pasamonte, who was the
first that jumped in the campaign free and unfettered, and, attacking the
fallen commissary, took away his sword and shotgun, with which, aiming
to one and pointing to the other, without ever shooting it, there was no guard at all
the field, because they fled, both from Pasamonte's shotgun and from
the many stones that the already loose galley slaves threw at them.
Sancho was very saddened by this event, because it was represented to him that the
who were fleeing had to report the case to the Holy Brotherhood, the
who, with a wounded bell, would go out to look for the criminals, and so he told him
to his master, and begged him to depart from there and ambush in the
sierra, which was close.
`` That is fine, '' said Don Quixote, `` but I know what I should now know.
make.
And, calling all the galley slaves, who were in an uproar and had
stripped the commissioner until he was naked, they were all put to the
round to see what he commanded them, and thus he said to them:
-From well-born people is to thank the benefits they receive, and one of the
sins that most offend God is ingratitude. Say it because you have already
seen, gentlemen, with manifest experience, what you have received from me;
in payment of which I would like, and it is my will, that, loaded with that chain that
I took off your necks, then you get on your way and you go to the city
del Toboso, and there you present yourself before Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso and her
say that his knight, that of the Sad Figure, is sent to entrust him,
and you tell him, point by point, all those who have had this famous adventure
to put you in the desired freedom; and, done this, you can go where
you would like to have a good fortune.
Ginés de Pasamonte answered for all, and said:
-What your grace commands us, our lord and liberator, is impossible
of all impossibility to fulfill it, because we cannot go together for the
roads, but alone and divided, and each one for his part, trying
get into the bowels of the earth, for not being found of the Holy
Brotherhood, which, without a doubt, has to come out in search of us. What
Your grace can do, and it is right that it do, is to change that service and
montazgo of Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso in some amount of Hail Marys and
creeds, which we will say by the intention of your mercy; And this is
something that can be accomplished night and day, fleeing or resting, in peace or
at war; but to think that we must now return to the pots of Egypt,
I mean, to take our chain and to set out on the Toboso trail, is to think
that it is now night, that it is not yet ten o'clock in the day, and it is to ask
us that like ordering pears from the elm.
-Well, I vote so! said Don Quixote, already enraged, "Don son of the
whore, Don Ginesillo de Paropillo, or as you call yourselves, that you have to go
alone, tail between legs, with the whole chain on his back.
Pasamonte, who was not well suffered, being already aware that don
Quixote was not very sane, since he had committed such nonsense as that of
wanting to give them freedom, seeing himself treated in that way, made the eye to
the companions, and, moving apart, began to rain so many stones
about Don Quixote, who did not allow himself to cover himself with the rodela; and the
poor Rocinante paid no more attention to the spur than if it were made of
bronze. Sancho followed his donkey, and with it he defended himself from the cloud and
hail that rained on both of them. Could not shield so well don
Quixote that they did not hit him I do not know how many pebbles in the body, with so much
force they hit him on the ground; and it had hardly fallen, when it was over
he the student and took the basin from his head, and gave him with it three or
four blows on the back and as many on the ground, with which he made it
pieces. They took off a robe that he had on his weapons, and his stockings
they wanted to take off his leggings if the greaves didn't get in the way. Sancho
They took off his coat, and, leaving him in a ball, dividing the others among themselves
spoils of the battle, they each went their part, with more care than
escape from the Brotherhood, which they feared, than to load off the chain and go to
Appear before Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso.
Only donkey and Rocinante, Sancho and Don Quixote were left; the donkey,
crestfallen and pensive, tossing his ears from time to time, thinking
that the storm of the stones had not yet ceased, that the
ears; Rocinante, lying next to his master, who also came to the ground from another
stone; Sancho, on the ball and fearful of the Holy Brotherhood; Don Quixote,
very pissed off to be seen so badly by the same ones who had so much good
done.
Chapter XXIII. Of what happened to the famous Don Quixote in Sierra
Morena, which was one of the rarer adventures than in this true
story are told
Seeing so badly Don Quixote, he said to his squire:
-Always, Sancho, I have heard you say, that doing villains good is
water in the sea. If I had believed what you told me, I would have excused
this regret; but it's already done: patience, and lesson from
here ahead.
"This is how your grace will teach you," answered Sancho, "as I am a Turk;"
But, well, he says that if he had believed me, this damage would have been excused,
believe me now and excuse another major; because I let him know that with the Santa
Brotherhood there is no use of chivalry, which is not given to her for how many
knights errant there are two maravedís; and know that it seems to me that your
arrows are buzzing in my ears.
`` Of course you are a coward, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` but why not
say that I am stubborn and that I never do what you advise me, this time
I want to take your advice and turn away from the fury that you fear so much; more has to
be with one condition: that never, in life or in death, you must say to
no one that I withdrew and turned away from this danger of fear, but to please
to your requests; that if you say something else, you will lie about it, and from now on
By then, and from then to now, I deny you, and I say that
You lie and you will lie every time you think or say it. And not me
you reply more, than just thinking that I turn away and withdraw from some danger,
especially déste, which seems to be wearing some is not a shadow of
fear, I am now to stay, and to wait here alone, not only at the
Holy Brotherhood that you say and fear, but the brothers of the twelve tribes
of Israel, and the seven Maccabees, and Castor and Pollux, and even all the
brothers and brotherhoods in the world.
`` Sir, '' answered Sancho, `` retiring is not fleeing, nor is waiting
sanity, when danger outweighs hope, and wise it is
save today for tomorrow and don't venture all in one day. And know that,
Although uncouth and villainous, I still have something of what they call good
government; So, don't regret taking my advice, but turn up
in Rocinante, if you can, or if not I will help you, and follow me, let him know
He says that we now need our feet more than our hands.
Don Quixote climbed up, without saying a further word to him, and, leading Sancho on his
donkey, they entered through a part of Sierra Morena, which was right there,
leading Sancho to go through it all and go to Viso, or
Almodóvar del Campo, and hide for a few days because of those rough edges,
not to be found if the Brotherhood seeks them. Encourage this to have seen that
From the skirmish of the galley slaves, the pantry that
on his ass he came, which he judged a miracle, according to what they carried
and they searched for the galley slaves.
Just as Don Quixote entered those mountains, his heart rejoiced,
appearing to him those well-to-do places for the adventures he was looking for.
The marvelous events that in such
loneliness and harshness had succeeded knights errant. I was thinking
in these things, so imbibed and transported in them that of no other
remembered. Nor did Sancho take any other care - after it seemed to him that
walked by safe part- but to satisfy his stomach with the reliefs
that of the clerical dispossession they had remained; and so he went after his master sitting at
the womanizer on her donkey, pulling out of a sack and packing in her
belly; and did not give himself to find another chance, while he was
that way, a shit.
At this, he raised his eyes and saw that his master was standing, trying with his
tip of the sandeel raise I do not know what lump that was fallen on the ground, so
Who rushed to help him if necessary; and when it arrived
it was at the time that with the tip of the sandeel he was lifting a cushion and a clutched suitcase
to him, half rotten, or rotten altogether, and undone; more, it weighed so much,
that it was necessary for Sancho to get down to take them, and his master commanded him to
see what came in the suitcase.
Sancho did it with great alacrity, and although the suitcase came closed with a
chain and its padlock, because of how broken and rotten it was, he saw what was in it,
that were four shirts of thin holland and other things of canvas, no
less curious than clean, and in a handkerchief he found a good heap of
golden shields; and, just as he saw them, he said:
-Blessed be all heaven, which has given us an adventure that is
advantage!
And looking for more, he found a memory book, richly trimmed. This one will
Don Quixote asked, and ordered him to keep the money and take it for himself.
Sancho kissed his hands for mercy, and, robbing his suitcase
lingerie, put it in the sack of the pantry. All of which seen by don
Quixote said:
-Paréceme, Sancho, and it is not possible that it is something else, that some walker
misguided must have passed through this mountain range, and, skipping miscreants,
They must have killed, and forced him to bury in this so hidden part.
`` It can't be that, '' answered Sancho, `` because if they were thieves, I don't know
they will leave this money here.
-True you say -said Don Quixote-, and thus, I do not guess or give in what this
it could be; more, wait: we'll see if in this memory book there are any
written thing where we can track and come in knowledge of what
we wish.
He opened it, and the first thing he found in it written, as in a draft, although
very good lyrics, it was a sonnet, which, reading aloud because Sancho also
heard it, saw it say this way:
Or does love lack knowledge,
or it has too much cruelty, or it is not my pity
equal to the occasion that condemns me
to the harshest kind of torment.
But if love is god, it is argument
that ignores nothing, and it is a very good reason
that a god is not cruel. Well, who orders
the terrible pain that I adore and feel?
If I say it's you, Fili, I'm wrong;
that so much bad for so much good does not fit,
nor does this ruin come from heaven.
I will soon have to die, which is the most true;
that the evil of who causes it is not known
a miracle is getting the medicine right.
`` Because of that trova, '' said Sancho, `` you can't know anything, if it isn't because
that thread that is there will remove the ball of everything.
-What thread is here? Don Quixote said.
"It seems to me," said Sancho, "that your grace named thread there."
"I did not say but Fili," replied Don Quixote, "and this, without a doubt, is the name
of the lady of whom the author complains of this sonnet; and by faith it must be
reasonable poet, or I know little about art.
"Then also," said Sancho, "is he understood at your mercy as trovas?"
"And more than you think," replied Don Quixote, "and you will see it when
take a letter, written in verse from top to bottom, to my lady Dulcinea
of the Toboso. Because I want you to know, Sancho, that all or the most gentlemen
Andantes of the past age were great troubadours and great musicians; that
These two abilities, or thank you, to put it better, are attached to the
walking lovers. It is true that the verses of the past gentlemen
they have more of spirit than of beauty.
`` Read more, your grace, '' said Sancho, `` you will already find something that
please.
Don Quixote turned the page and said:
-This is prose, and it looks like a letter.
"Missive letter, sir?" asked Sancho.
"At first it seems nothing but love," answered Don Quixote.
-Well, read your grace altogether -said Sancho-, I really liked these things
of loves.
"May it please me," said Don Quixote.
And, reading it aloud, as Sancho had begged him, he saw that it said
way:
Your false promise and my certain misfortune lead me to where before
the news of my death that the reasons for my complaints will return to your ears.
You discarded me, oh ungrateful one, for who has more, not for who is worth more than
me; but if virtue were wealth to be valued, I would not envy said
others or cry their own misfortunes. What raised your beauty have
knocked down your works: through her I understood that you were an angel, and through them I know
that you are a woman. Be in peace, cause of my war, and make heaven that
your husband's deceptions are always covered up, because you are not
sorry for what you did and I do not take revenge for what I do not want.
Finishing reading the letter, Don Quixote said:
-Less for this one than for the verses you can get more than who
wrote is some scorned lover.
And, leafing through most of the booklet, he found other verses and letters, which some
could read and others could not; but what they all contained were complaints, regrets,
mistrust, flavors and disappointments, favors and disdain, solenized the
some and the others cried.
While Don Quixote passed the book, Sancho passed the suitcase, without
leave a corner in all of it, nor on the cushion, that he did not look for, scrutinize and
inquired, nor sewing that did not undo, nor vedija of wool that did not
teach yourself, because nothing was left due to diligence or bad errand: such
candy had awakened in him the shields found, which passed from
hundred. And, although he did not find more than what he found, he considered the
flights of the blanket, the vomiting of the brew, the blessings of the stakes,
the handfuls of the muleteer, the lack of saddlebags, the theft of the overcoat and all
the hunger, thirst and fatigue that he had passed in the service of his good lord,
seeming to him that he was more than well paid with the mercy received from the
delivery of the find.
The Knight of the Sad Figure was left with great desire to know who it was.
the owner of the suitcase, guessing, from the sonnet and letter, from the money
in gold and for the good shirts, which must have been from some principal
in love, whom disdain and bad treatment of his lady must have
led to some desperate end. But, as for that place
uninhabitable and rugged did not seem like a person from whom to
get informed, he was not cured of more than to move forward, without taking another path
that the one that Rocinante wanted, that was where he could walk, always
with imagination that could not miss for those weeds some stranger
adventure.
Going, then, with this thought, he saw that, on top of a mountain that
in front of his eyes, a man was leaping, from cliff to cliff.
cliff and from bush to bush, with strange lightness. It was imagined that he was naked,
his thick black beard, his hair many and ruffled, his feet
barefoot and legs without anything; the thighs covered a pair of breeches,
apparently of tawny velvet, but so shattered that by many
parts were revealed to him the meats. His head was uncovered, and although
It happened with the lightness that has been said, all these trifles looked at and noticed
the Knight of the Sad figure; and, although he tried, he could not follow it,
because it was not given to Rocinante's weakness to walk around those
harshness, and even more so as he is short-footed and phlegmatic. Then he imagined don
Quixote that he was the owner of the cushion and the suitcase, and he proposed
look for him, even if he knew how to walk a year through those mountains until he found him;
And so he ordered Sancho to get off the donkey and cut across the side of
the mountain, that he would go for the other and it could be that they ran into, with this
diligence, with that man who with such haste had
in front of.
`` I won't be able to do that, '' answered Sancho, `` because by turning away from your
mercy, then fear is with me, which assails me with a thousand kinds of
shocks and visions. And serve you what I say as a warning, so that from here
Go ahead, don't remove a finger from your presence.
`` It will be so, '' said the one with the Sad Figure, `` and I am very happy that you
you want to use my encouragement, which you must not miss, even if you lack the
anima of the body. And now come after me little by little, or as you can, and do
of the lanterns eyes; we will surround this serrezuela: perhaps we will run into
that man we saw, who, without a doubt, is none other than the owner
of our find.
To which Sancho replied:
-It would be better not to look for him, because if we found him and perhaps he was the
owner of the money, of course I have to restore it; and so it was better,
without doing this useless diligence, I will possess it in good faith until, for
another way less curious and diligent, it seems its true lord; and maybe
it was in time that I had spent it, and then the king made me frank.
"You fooled yourself in that, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; that, since we have fallen
in suspicion of who is the owner, almost in front, we are obliged to
look for him and return them; and, when we did not look for him, the vehement suspicion
that we have that he is already puts us in as much guilt as if he were.
So, Sancho friend, do not be sorry for the street buster, for which I
will take away if I find you.
And so he stung Rocinante, and Sancho followed him with his customary donkey; and,
having surrounded part of the mountain, they found in a stream, fallen, dead
and a half dog food and rookery, a saddled mule and
braked; all of which further confirmed in them the suspicion that he who
fled he was the owner of the mule and the cushion.
While looking at her, they heard a whistle like a shepherd guarding cattle, already
untimely, to his sinister hand, they looked like a good number of goats, and
behind them, on top of the mountain, seemed the goatherd who guarded them,
that he was an old man. Don Quixote shouted at him, and begged him to come down
where were you. He yelled back that who had brought them down that
place, few or no times trodden except by the feet of goats or wolves and
other beasts that were there. Sancho answered him to come down, that
they would all give him a good account. The goatherd went down, and when he arrived where he
Quixote was, he said:
-I'll bet you're looking at the rental mule that's dead on that
hollow. Well, in good faith, he has been in that place for six months.
Tell me: have you come across its owner?
"We have not come across anyone," answered Don Quixote, "but a cushion and a
briefcase that not far from this place we find.
`` I also found it, '' replied the goatherd, `` but I never wanted to pick it up or
get to her, fearful of some outrage and that they would not ask me for
theft; who is the lowly devil, and under his feet he rises to the name
thing where he stumbles and falls, without knowing how or how not.
`` That is what I say, '' answered Sancho, `` that I also found it, and
I didn't want to get there with a stone's throw; there I left her and there she stays
As it was, I don't want a dog with a cowbell.
"Tell me, good man," said Don Quixote, "do you know who the owner is?"
these garments?
"What I can say," said the goatherd, "is that" there will be at the foot of six
months, a little more unless, he reached a flock of shepherds, which will be
About three leagues from this place, a young man of gentle stature and good looks,
gentleman on that same mule that is dead there, and with the same cushion and
suitcase that you say you found and did not touch. Ask us which part
This mountain range was the roughest and most hidden; let's tell him this was where
now we are; And that's the truth, because if you enter half a league more
inside, you may not be able to get out; and I am amazed at how you have
been able to get here, because there is no way or path that to this place
route. I say, then, that, hearing our reply, the young man returned
the reins and headed towards the place where we pointed out, leaving us
all happy with his good size, and admired by his demand and the rush
with which we saw him walk and turn towards the mountains; and since then
We never saw him again, until after a few days he went out on the road to
one of our shepherds, and, without saying anything, he approached him and gave him
many fists and kicks, and then he went to the herd's donkey and took
how much bread and cheese in it she brought; And, with strange lightness, this done, he
he ambushed again in the sierra. As some goatherds learned this,
We went looking for almost two days in the most closed of this mountain range, at the end
of which we find him stuck in the hole of a thick and brave
cork oak. She came out to us with much meekness, her dress already torn, and
his face disfigured and tanned from the sun, so that he hardly
we knew, but the dresses, although torn, with the news that they
we had, they gave us to understand that it was the one we were looking for. Greet us
politely, and for a few very good reasons, he told us not to
let us marvel at seeing him walk like that, because it suited him that way
to fulfill a certain penance that for his many sins had been
imposed. We begged him to tell us who he was, but we could never finish it
with the. We also ask that, when there is a need for sustenance, without the
which could not happen, tell us where we would find him, because with a lot of love
and we would take care of it; And if this was not to your liking either, what,
at least, he would go out to ask for it, and not to take it away from the shepherds. Thanked
our offer, apologized for past assaults, and offered to
I ask for the love of God from there, without bothering anyone.
As for the stay in his room, he said that he had no
other than the one that offered him the occasion where he took the night; and
He ended his talk with such a tender cry, that we were all made of stone.
that we had listened to him, if in him we did not accompany him, considering him
how we had seen him the first time, and which one did we see him then. Because,
As I have said, he was a very gentle and graceful young man, and in his courteous
and agreed reasons showed to be a well-born and very courteous person;
that, since we were rustic who listened to him, his kindness was
so much so that it was enough to make itself known to the same rusticity. And, being in
the best of his talk, he stopped and fell silent; stared at the ground for
a good space, in which we all stayed and suspended, waiting
where was this rapture to end, with no small pity to see it;
because, by what he did to open his eyes, to be fixed looking at the ground without
move the eyelashes for a long time, and other times close them, pressing the lips together and
raising the eyebrows, we easily learned that some accident of madness
had happened. But he quickly gave us to understand what
we thought, because he got up with great fury from the ground, where he had
lay down, and lashed out with the first he found beside him, with such boldness and
rage that, if we did not take it away, would kill him with handfuls and bites; and all
This he did, saying: '' Ah, femented Fernando! Here, here you will pay me
unreason that you did to me: these hands will take out your heart, where they house
and they have all the evils together, mainly fraud and
deception! '' And to these he added other reasons, which all were aimed at saying
bad of that Fernando and to label him as a traitor and deceitful. Let's get rid of it,
then, with no little regret, and he, without saying another word, turned away from
us and ran into ambush through these thickets and weeds, so
that made the Seguille impossible for us. From this we conjecture that madness
came at times, and that someone named Fernando must have
done some bad deed, as heavy as the term to which it was shown
had driven. All of which has been confirmed later here with the times,
that there have been many, that he has gone out on the road, some to ask the
pastors give him what they carry to eat and others to take it away for
strength; because when he is with the accident of madness, although the
pastors willingly offer it to him, he does not admit it, but takes it
handfuls; and when it is in his brain, he asks for it for the love of God, courteous and
restrained, and yields many thanks for it, and not with lack of tears.
And truly I tell you, gentlemen, 'continued the goatherd,' that yesterday we determined
me and four boys, the two servants and the two friends of mine, to look for him
until we find him, and, after he has been found, already by force already by
grade, we have to take him to the town of Almodóvar, which is from here eight
leagues, and there we will cure him, if his illness has a cure, or we will know who
is when it is in your brains, and if you have relatives to whom to report your
misfortune". This is, gentlemen, what I can tell you about what you have
asked; and understand that the owner of the garments you found is the
just as you saw passing by with as much lightness as nudity - which had already
Don Quixote said how he had seen that man go by jumping across the
saw.
Who was amazed at what the goatherd had heard, and was left with more
desire to know who the unfortunate madman was; and proposed in itself the same as
I had already thought: of looking for a street all over the mountain, leaving no corner or
cave in it that I did not look, until I found him. But luck made it better
what he thought or expected, because at that very moment it seemed,
between a ravine of a mountain range that came out where they were, the young man
that he was looking for, which had been talking to each other things that could not be
understood closely, the more from afar. His suit was what has been painted,
only that, coming close, Don Quixote saw that a chopped ponytail that
on itself it was of amber; where did he just understand that person who
Such habits he brought must not be of the lowest quality.
As the young man came to them, he greeted them with a disagreeable voice and
anger, but with great courtesy. Don Quixote returned the greetings with no
less restraint, and, alighting from Rocinante, with gentle restraint and
gracefully, he went to hug him and had him a good space closely between his
arms, as if I had known him for a long time. The other, to whom
We can call the Roto de la Mala Figura - like Don Quixote the one with the
Sad-, after allowing herself to be embraced, she pushed him away a little, and,
placed his hands on Don Quixote's shoulders, he was looking at him, as if
he wanted to see if he knew him; no less admired perhaps to see the figure,
size and arms of Don Quixote, that Don Quixote was seeing him. On
resolution, the first to speak after the embrace was Roto, and
said what will be said later.
Chapter XXIV. Where the adventure of the Sierra Morena continues
History says that the attention with which Don Quixote
listened to the astrous Caballero de la Sierra, who, continuing his
talk, said:
-By the way, sir, whoever you are, I don't know you, I
I appreciate the samples and the courtesy that you have used with me; and I would like
I find myself in terms that with more than the will could serve the one that
you have shown to have me in the good reception that you have given me, but not
my luck wants to give me something else that corresponds to the good works that
they make me, what good wishes to satisfy them.
"Those that I have," answered Don Quixote, "are for serving you; so much, that I had
determined not to leave these mountains until we find you and find out from you if the
pain that in the strangeness of your life you show could be found
some kind of remedy; and if it were necessary to search for him, search for him with the
diligence possible. And when your misfortune was one of those that
have closed the doors to all kinds of comfort, I thought to help you
mourn her and mourn her as best she could, which is still consolation in the
misfortunes find someone who hurts them. And, if my good try
deserves to be thanked with some kind of courtesy, I beg of you, sir,
for the much that I see that is enclosed in you, and together I conjure you by the
thing that in this life you have loved or love the most, tell me who you are and
the cause that has brought you to live and die among these solitudes as
brute animal, for you dwell among them so alien to yourself as
show your suit and person. And I swear, added Don Quixote, by the order
of chivalry that I received, though unworthy and sinful, and by the profession of
knight errant, if in this, sir, you please me, to serve you with
You will see what it requires me to be who I am: pray remedying your
Unfortunately, if it has a remedy, pray helping us to mourn it, as I have
promised.
The Knight of the Forest, who in such a way heard that of the Sad
Figure, did nothing but look at him, and look at him and turn to look up
down; and, after he had taken a good look at him, he said:
-If you have something to give me to eat, for God's sake give it to me; that,
after having eaten, I will do everything that is commanded to me, in gratitude
of such good wishes as they have been shown to me here.
Then they took Sancho from his sack and the goatherd from his bag, with which
Roto satisfied his hunger, eating what they gave him as a person
stunned, so hasty that she did not give space from one bite to the other, because before
it swallowed them that it swallowed; and, while he ate, neither he nor those who
they looked and spoke a word. As he finished eating, he beckoned to them to
continue, as they did, and he led them to a green meadow that
turn of a rock a little deviated from there it was. On reaching him he stretched out
on the ground, on top of the grass, and the others did the same; and all this
without anyone speaking, until the Broken, after having settled into
his seat said:
-If you like, gentlemen, let me tell you in brief reasons the immensity of my
misadventures, you have to promise me that with no question, no other
thing, do not interrupt the thread of my sad story; because at the point
that you do it, whatever will be counting will remain in that one.
These reasons for the Roto brought to Don Quixote's memory the story that
had counted his squire, when he did not match the number of goats that
they had crossed the river and the story was left pending. But, going back to
Broken, he went on to say:
-This prevention that I do is because I would like to briefly go through the story
of my misfortunes; that bringing them to memory is of no use to me
have to add others again, and the less you ask me, the quicker
I will finish decillas, since I will not stop telling anything whatsoever
important to not fully satisfy your desire.
Don Quixote promised him, on behalf of the others, and he, with this insurance,
started this way:
- «My name is Cardenio; my homeland, a city of the best desta
Andalusia; my lineage, noble; my parents, rich; my misfortune, so much so that
my parents must have cried and felt my lineage, unable to alleviate it
with its wealth; that to remedy the misfortunes of heaven, the
goods of fortune. He lived in this same earth a heaven, where he put love
all the glory that I could succeed in wanting myself: such is the beauty of Luscinda,
a maiden as noble and rich as I, but more fortunate and less
steadfastness which was due to my honest thoughts. To this luscinda
I loved, wanted and adored from my tender and first years, and she loved me
with that simplicity and good spirit that his young age allowed. They knew
our parents our attempts, and they did not weigh it, because they well saw
that, when they moved on, they could have no other purpose than to marry us,
something that was almost agreed by the equality of our lineage and wealth.
Age grew, and with it the love of both, that Luscinda's father
It seemed to him that out of good respects he was obliged to refuse me the entrance of
his house, almost imitating in this the parents of that Thisbe so decadent
of the poets. And it was this denial adding flame to flame and wish to wish,
because, although they silenced the languages, they could not put the
feathers, which, with more freedom than tongues, tend to imply
to those who want what is enclosed in the soul; that many times the
The presence of the loved thing disturbs and mutes the most determined and
the most daring tongue. Oh dear, and how many bills did I write! How
gifted and honest answers I had! How many songs did I compose and how many
in love verses, where the soul declared and transferred its feelings,
painted his fiery desires, entertained his memories, and recreated his
Will!
»In effect, seeing me in a hurry, and that my soul was consumed with the desire to
see it, I determined to put into action and finish in a point what seemed to me
it was more convenient to leave with my desired and deserved prize; and it was the
ask her father for a legitimate wife, as I did; to what he
He replied that he thanked me for the will that I showed to honor him, and
wanting to honor me with his garments, but that, being my father alive, he
It was just right to make that demand; because, if it were not with
much will and pleasure of hers, she was not a Luscinda woman to take
theft.
I thanked him for his good attempt, seeming to me that he was right in what
he said, and that my father would come to it as I told him to; and with this
I tried, then at that very moment, I went to tell my father what
wished. And as I entered a room where he was, I found him with
an open letter in his hand, which, before I spoke a word to him,
gave it to me and said: `` By that letter you will see, Cardenio, the will that the Duke
Ricardo has to do you mercy ''. » This Duke Richard, like you already,
Gentlemen, you must know, he is a great of Spain who has his status in
best of Andalusia. «I took and read the letter, which was so dear
that to me it seemed wrong if my father stopped fulfilling what in her
He was asked, which was to send me later to where he was; what did i want
was a companion, not a servant, of his eldest son, and that he took charge of the
to put myself in a state that corresponded to the estimate in which I was held. Read
the letter and I fell silent reading it, especially when I heard my father say to me:
Here in two days you will leave, Cardenio, to do the will of the duke; and gives
thank God that he is opening the way for you wherever you reach what I know
you deserve. '' To these he added other parent-counseling reasons.
»The end of my departure came, I spoke to Luscinda one night, I told her everything
what happened, and I did the same to his father, begging him to entertain
some days and delayed giving it status until I saw what Ricardo
loved me. He promised me and she confirmed it with a thousand oaths and a thousand
fainting. In short, I came to where Duke Ricardo was. I was so good
received and treated, which of course began to envy to do his trade,
the ancient servants having it, it seemed to them that you show that the
Duke gave me a favor, it had to be to his detriment. But the one
The most comfortable with my going was a second son of the Duke, named Fernando,
handsome young man, gentleman, liberal and in love, who, in a short time,
he wanted him to be his friend, who gave everyone something to say; and, although the
The older man loved me well and gave me mercy, he did not reach the extreme with which he
Fernando loved me and treated me.
»It is, then, the case that, as among friends there is no secret thing that is not
communicate, and the privilege that I had with Don Fernando stopped being him by
being friendship, all his thoughts declared to me, especially one
in love, which brought him a little uneasiness. I wanted one well
peasant, vassal of her father (and she had them very rich), and was so
beautiful, demure, discreet and honest that no one who knew her
determined in which of these things he had more excellence or more
get ahead. These so good parts of the beautiful peasant reduced to such
end the wishes of Don Fernando, which was determined, to be able to achieve it
and conquer the strength of the farmer, give her word to be her husband,
because otherwise it was to seek the impossible. I, bound of your
friendship, with the best reasons that I knew and with the most vivid examples that
I could, I tried to hinder him and divert him from that purpose. But seeing as not
took advantage, I determined to tell the case to Duke Ricardo, his father. More
Don Fernando, as cunning and discreet, was suspicious and feared of this, for
It seemed to him that I was obliged, instead of being a good servant, not to have
covert thing that so much to the detriment of the honor of my lord the duke
came; And so, for fun and fooling me, he told me that he couldn't find a better one
remedy to be able to remove from memory the beauty that so subject
he had to be absent for a few months; and that he wanted the absence
was that the two of us came to my father's house, on the occasion that
they would give the duke who came to see and show some very good horses that in
There was my city, which is the mother of the best in the world.
»I scarcely heard him say this, when, out of my hobby, although his
determination was not so good, I approved it by one of the most
they could be imagined, to see what a good opportunity and situation
He offered me to see my Luscinda again. With this thought and wish,
I approved of his opinion and strove his purpose, telling him to put it
work as soon as possible, because, in effect, the absence made its
office, despite the strongest thoughts. Already when he came to me
say this, as it later became known, had enjoyed the peasant with the title
husband, and he waited for an opportunity to discover himself safe, fearful of what
the duke his father would do when he knew his nonsense.
"It happened, then, that, like love in young men, for the most part, it did not
it is but appetite, which, as delight has its last end, in
reaching him ends and he has to go back what seemed
love, because it cannot go beyond the term that nature gave it, the
which term did not put to what is true love ...; I want to say that,
Just as Don Fernando enjoyed the farmer, his desires were appeased and he
their eagerness caught cold; and if he pretended to want to be absent first, for
to remedy them, now he was really trying to leave, not to put them into execution.
The duke gave him leave, and ordered me to accompany him. We come to my city
my father received him as who he was; Then I saw Luscinda, they went back to
to live, although they had not been dead or muffled, my desires, of the
which I gave an account, for my bad, to Don Fernando, for it seems to me that, in the law
of the great friendship he showed, he should not hide anything from him. Praise him
beauty, grace and discretion of Luscinda in such a way that my
praises moved in him the desire to want to see a maiden of so many good
ornate parties. I fulfill them, by my short luck, showing it a
night, by candlelight, through a window where we both used to
tell. Viola in sayo, such that all the beauties until then for him
views put them into oblivion. He fell silent, lost consciousness, became absorbed and,
finally, so in love which one will you see in the speech of my story
misfortune. And, to further ignite the desire, which was jealous of me and heaven
alone he discovered, fortune willed that one day he found a ticket of his
asking me to ask her father for wife, so discreet, so honest
and so in love that, while reading it, he told me that in solo Luscinda
contained all the graces of beauty and understanding that in the
other women in the world were spread out.
»It is true that I want to confess now that, since I saw with how
just causes Don Fernando praised Luscinda, I was sorry to hear those
praises from his mouth, and I began to fear and distrust him, because I do not know
he would spend time where he didn't want us to deal with Luscinda, and he would move his
talk, even if I trujese it by the hair; something that awakened in me a
I do not know what of jealousy, not because I feared any setback of goodness and
Luscinda's faith, but, with all that, it made me fear my fate just as much as
she assured me. Don Fernando always tried to read the papers that I
Luscinda sent and those she replied to me, by way of discretion
I liked both of them very much. So it came to pass that, Luscinda having asked me for a
chivalric book to read, who she was very fond of, who was
that of Amadís de Gaula ... »
Don Quixote had not well heard the name of a chivalric book, when he said:
-If your grace told me, at the beginning of your story, that your
Mrs. Luscinda's mercy was fond of chivalric books, not
it would take another exaggeration to make me understand the highness of his
understanding, because he was not as good as you, sir, you have
painted, if it lacked the taste of such a tasty legend: so, to
with me, it is not necessary to spend more words in declaring her beauty,
courage and understanding; that, just having understood his hobby, the
I confirm by the most beautiful and most discreet woman in the world. And I would like
sir, that your grace would have sent him along with Amadís de Gaula to
Well, Don Rugel from Greece, I know that Mrs. Luscinda would like
much of Daraida and Geraya, and the discretions of Pastor Darinel and
those admirable verses of his bucolic, sung and performed by
he with all grace, discretion and ease. But time may come in
that this fault be corrected, and it does not take longer to make the amendment of how much
may your grace be served to come with me to my village, that there
I will be able to give you more than three hundred books, which are the gift of my soul and the
entertainment of my life; although I have for myself that I no longer have any,
thanks to the malice of evil and envious enchanters. And forgive me yours
at the mercy of having contravened what we promised not to interrupt his
talk, then, in hearing things of knights and knights-errant, thus
it is in my hand to stop speaking in them, as it is in that of the rays of the
sun stop heating, nor moisten in the moon. So sorry and
continue, which is what is now more relevant.
While Don Quixote was saying what has been said, he had been
Cardenio's head fell on his chest, showing signs of being
deeply thoughtful. And, since Don Quixote told him twice that
continued his story, neither raised his head nor answered a word; but
After a long space, he picked it up and said:
-It cannot be taken out of my mind, nor will there be someone who takes it from me in the
world, nor who would give me anything else to understand (and it would be a fool to
he understood or believed otherwise), but that that beautiful blow of the master
Elisabat was in love with Queen Madésima.
-That no, I vote so! replied Don Quixote with great anger (and threw him,
as usual) -; and that is a very great malice, or mischief,
better to say: Queen Madásima was a very leading lady, and it is not
to presume that such a tall princess had to be tamed with a pottery; and
Whoever understands otherwise, lies like a very great scoundrel. And i know
I will imply, on foot or on horseback, armed or unarmed, night or day,
or as you like.
Cardenio was looking at him very attentively, to whom the
accident of his madness and he was not here to continue his story; either
Don Quixote heard it, as he had disliked what Madásima had
I had heard. Strange case; that thus he returned for her as if truly
was his true and natural mistress: such had him
books! I say, then, that, as Cardenio was already mad and he heard himself trying to
lie and scoundrel, with other similar denials, he thought the
mocking, and lifted a pebble that he found next to him, and hit it on the breasts
such a blow to Don Quixote that he fell on his back. Sancho Panza, what about
in such a way he saw his master stop, he lashed out at the madman with a clenched fist; and the
Roto received him in such a way that with a fist he struck him at his feet, and
then she climbed on top of him and fogged his ribs very much to her taste. The
goatherd, who wanted to defend him, ran the same danger. And, after the
he had everyone exhausted and crushed, he left them and went, with gentle calm, to
ambush on the mountain.
Sancho got up, and, with the rage he had at seeing himself beaten so without
deserve it, he went to take revenge on the goatherd, telling him that he had
the guilt of not having warned them that that man took time to
craziness; that, if they knew this, they would have been on notice to be able to
save. The goatherd replied that he had already said it, and that if he did not
He had heard, it wasn't his fault. Sancho Panza replied, and returned to
replicate the goatherd, and it was the end of the replicas to grasp the beards and
give themselves such handfuls that, if Don Quixote did not put them at peace, they would
pieces. Sancho said, holding on to the goatherd:
-Leave me your mercy, Mr. Knight of the Sad Figure, that in this one,
who is a villain like me and is not knighted, well I can save myself
satisfy me of the injury he has done to me, fighting with him hand to hand, as
honest man.
`` Yes, '' said Don Quixote, `` but I know that he is not to blame for what
happened.
With this he appeased them, and Don Quixote again asked the goatherd if it was
possible to find Cardenio, because he had a great desire to know the
end of his story. The goatherd told him what he had first told him, that
It was not really knowing his trite; but what if I walked a lot through those
contours, I would not fail to find him, sane or mad.
Chapter XXV. That is about the strange things that in Sierra Morena
succeeded the valiant knight of La Mancha, and of the imitation he made of
the penance of Beltenebros
He said goodbye to the goatherd Don Quixote, and, climbing again on Rocinante,
commanded Sancho to follow him, which he did, with his donkey, very
reluctantly. They went little by little, entering the roughest of the mountain, and
Sancho was dead for reasoning with his master, and he wanted him to start the
talk, for not contravening what I had ordered; more, not being able
suffer so much silence, he said:
"Mr. Don Quixote, your grace bless me and give me leave;
that from here I want to return to my house, and to my wife and children, with
which, at least, I will speak and share whatever I want; because
want your grace to go with him through these solitudes, day and
night, and that I do not speak to him when I please is to bury me alive. Yeah I know
I wish the animals spoke, as they spoke in times of
Guisopete, it would be less bad, because I would share with my donkey what
I would come willingly, and with this my bad luck would pass; which is a tough thing, and
that cannot be carried in patience, looking for adventures all your life
and find nothing but kicks and buttresses, bricks and handfuls, and yet
this, we have to sew our mouths, without daring to say what man has in
her heart, as if it were dumb.
`` I understand you, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` you die because I raise you
the interdict that I have put on your tongue. Give it up and say what
you want, on condition that this uprising does not last more than in
how long we will walk through these mountains.
"Let it be," said Sancho, "let me speak now, then God knows what it will be;"
and, beginning to enjoy that passport, I say that what was going to your
Mercy in returning so much for that queen Magimasa, or what is her name? Or what
Was it the case that this abbot was his friend or not? What if your grace
will happen with it, because he was not his judge, well I think that the madman would pass
go ahead with their story, and they would have been spared the pebble blow, and
the kicks, and even more than six torniscones.
"By faith, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "that if you knew, as I know,
how honored and what a leading lady was Queen Madásima, I know that
say that I had a lot of patience, because I did not break my mouth where such
profanities came out; because it is very blasphemous to say or think that a
queen is pregnant with a surgeon. The truth of the story is that
Master Elisabat, that the madman said, was a very prudent and very
sound advice, and he served as a tutor and physician to the queen; but think that
she was his friend is nonsense worthy of very great punishment. And, because you see
that Cardenio did not know what he said, you have to notice that when he said it
he was out of judgment.
`` That's what I say, '' said Sancho, `` that there was no need to account for the
words of a madman, because if good luck did not help your mercy
and direct the pebble to the head, as it directed to the chest, good
Let us stay for having returned for that my lady, God help me. Then,
You hope that Cardenio will not get rid of himself because he is crazy!
-Against the sane and the foolish, any knight-errant is obliged to
return for the honor of women, whatever they may be, the more for
the queens of such high guise and pro as was Queen Madásima, whom I
I have a particular fondness for its good parts; because, outside of having been
beautiful, she was also very prudent and very suffered in her calamities, that the
had many; and the advice and company of the teacher Elisabat went and
were of much benefit and relief to be able to carry their work with
prudence and patience. And from here the ignorant and evil vulgar took the opportunity
intent on saying and thinking that she was his manceba; and they lie, I say
again, and another dozen will lie, all those who think and say.
"I neither say it nor think it," answered Sancho, "there they have it; with his
eat bread. If they were killed or not, they will have given the account to God.
I come from my vineyards, I know nothing; I am not a friend of knowing other people's lives; that he
who buys and lies, in his bag he feels it. The more, that naked I was born,
I am naked: I neither lose nor win; more than that, what's wrong with me? AND
many think there are bacon and no stakes. But who can put
gates to the field? How much more, that of God they said.
"Goodness to me," said Don Quixote, "and what nonsense you are, Sancho,
stringing! What goes from what we treat to the sayings that you enhilas? For your
life, Sancho, what streets; and from here on, get involved in spurring on your
ass, and stop doing what you don't care about. And understand with all your
five senses that everything I have done, do and do, goes very well
in reason and very according to the rules of chivalry, which I know better than
how many gentlemen professed them in the world.
"Sir," replied Sancho, "and is it a good rule of cavalry that we walk
lost in these mountains, without path or path, looking for a madman, the
which, after being found, may come to him in will to finish what he left
begun, not from his tale, but from the head of your worship and my
ribs, ending up breaking all over the place?
"Hush, I tell you again, Sancho," said Don Quixote; because I let you know
that not only brings me in these parts the desire to find the madman, but the
that I have to do in them a feat with which I have to earn a perpetual name
and fame in everything discovered on earth; and it will be such, that I have to take with
she the seal of everything that can make a walker perfect and famous
gentleman.
-And is that feat of great danger? asked Sancho Panza.
`` No, '' replied the one with the Sad Figure, `` since in such a way he could
roll the dice, let us take chance instead of meeting; but everything has to
be in your diligence.
-In my diligence? -said Sancho.
"Yes," said Don Quixote, "because if you return quickly from where I intend to send you,
Soon my sorrow will end and soon my glory will begin. And, because it is not
It is good that I have more suspense, waiting for what my
reasons, Sancho, I want you to know that the famous Amadís de Gaula was one of
the most perfect knights errant. I have not said well it was one: it was the
alone, the first, the only one, the lord of all who were in his time in
the world. Bad year and bad month for Don Belianís and for all those who
say that he was equaled in something, because they are deceived, I swear true. Say
also that, when a painter wants to become famous in his art, he tries to
imitate the originals of the most unique painters he knows; and this same
rule runs by all the more trades or account exercises that serve
for adornment of the republics. And so he has to do it and he does what he wants
achieve the name of prudent and long-suffering, imitating Ulysses, in whose person and
Homer paints us a living portrait of prudence and suffering;
as Virgil also showed us, in the person of Aeneas, the value of a son
pious and the sagacity of a brave and knowledgeable captain, not painting or
discovering it as they were, but as they were to be, to remain
example to the men to come of their virtues. This is the same luck, Amadís
It was the north, the star, the sun of the brave and in love knights,
who should we imitate all those who under the banner of love and
of the cavalry we militate. This being then, as it is, I find,
Sancho friend, that the errant knight who will imitate him the most will be closer
to achieve perfection in chivalry. And one of the things in which more
this gentleman showed his prudence, courage, bravery, suffering, firmness and
love, it was when he retired, scorned by Mrs. Oriana, to do
penance in the Peña Pobre, changed its name to Beltenebros, name,
by the way, significant and proper for the life that he of his will
had chosen. I hoped that, it is easier for me to imitate him in this than not in
split giants, head serpents, slaughter endria, disrupt
armies, fail armadas and undo enchantments. And, well these places
They are so accommodated for such effects, there is no reason to let it pass
the occasion, which now so comfortably offers me its locks.
`` Indeed, '' said Sancho, `` what is it that your grace wants to do in
this so remote place?
`` Have I not already told you, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that I want to imitate Amadís,
doing here the desperate, the watermelon and the furious, to imitate
together with the brave Don Roldán, when he found in a fountain the signs
that Angelica the Beauty had committed vileness with Medoro, of whose
grief went mad and uprooted the trees, muddied the waters of the
clear springs, killed shepherds, destroyed livestock, burned huts, toppled
houses, dragged mares and did another hundred thousand insolences, worthy of eternal
name and writing? And, since I am not going to imitate Roldán, or Orlando,
o Rotolando (which all these three names had), part by part in all
the crazy things he did, said and thought, I'll do the sketch, as best I can,
in which I seem to be most essential. And it could be that he came to
content myself with only the imitation of Amadís, who without doing crazy things of damage,
but of tears and feelings, he achieved as much fame as the most.
`` It seems to me, '' said Sancho, `` that the gentlemen who did so were
provoked and had cause to do those foolish things and penances, but
Your Grace, what cause have you to go mad? What lady has
disdained, or what signs have you found to suggest that Mrs.
Did Dulcinea del Toboso play a naughty thing with a Moor or a Christian?
-There is the point -answered Don Quixote- and that is the finesse of my
business; than to go mad a knight errant with a cause, neither degree nor
thank you: the touch is misleading without occasion and make my lady understand that
If I do this in the dry, what would I do in the wet? The more, what a great opportunity
I have in the long absence that I have made of my always mistress Dulcinea
of the Toboso; that, as you already heard that shepherd of yore, Ambrosio say:
whoever is absent has all evils and fears. So, Sancho friend, no
spend time advising me to leave so strange, so happy and so unseen
imitation. I am crazy, I must be crazy until you come back with the
reply to a letter that I intend to send with you to my lady Dulcinea; what if
Whatever my faith is owed to, my folly and my penance come to an end; and
if it were to the contrary, I would be truly mad, and, being so, I would feel nothing.
I hope that, in whatever way I respond, I will get out of the conflict and work
in which you will leave me, enjoying the good that you wrestle me, by sane, or not
feeling the evil that you bring me, for crazy. But tell me, Sancho, do you bring good
saved the helmet of Mambrino ?; that I already saw that you lifted him off the ground when
that ungrateful one wanted to tear him to pieces. But he couldn't, where can he
to see the fineness of his temper.
To which Sancho replied:
-God lives, Mr. Knight of the Sad Figure, I cannot suffer or
bear in patience some things that your grace says, and that for them
I come to imagine that everything he tells me about chivalry and about reaching
kingdoms and empires, to give islands and to make other favors and greatness,
as it is the use of knights errant, that everything must be a matter of wind and
lie, and all nonsense, or hoax, or whatever we will call it. Because who
I will hear at your mercy that a barber's basin is the helmet of
Mambrino, and that he does not get out of this error in more than four days, what has to
think, but who says and affirms must have güero judgment? The
I carry it in the sack, all dented, and I take it to dress it in
my house and grow a beard in it, if God gives me so much grace that some
day see me with my wife and children.
`` Look, Sancho, by the same person you swore before, I swear to you, '' said Don
Quixote- that you have the shortest understanding that a squire has or had
in the world. What is it possible that as long as you have been with me, you have not
noticed that all the knights errant things seem
chimeras, foolishness and nonsense, and that they are all done the other way around? And no
because that's what it is, but because there is always a crowd among us
of enchanters that all our things change and barter and return to them
according to their taste, and according to their desire to favor or destroy us; and
Well, what looks like a barber's basin to you, looks like a barber's helmet to me.
Mambrino, and to another it will seem otherwise. And it was rare providence of the wise
that it is on my part to make it seem to everyone what is real and
it is truly Mambrino's helmet, because, being he of so much
esteem, everyone will persecute me for taking him away; but, how do you see that no
It is more of a barber's potty, they do not heal from procuralle, as it was shown
well in which he wanted to break him and left him on the ground without taking him; what by faith
that if he knew him, that he would never leave him. Save him, friend, for now
I have not needed it; that before I have to take off all these weapons and stay
naked as when I was born, if it gives me the will to continue in my
penance more to Roldán than to Amadís.
They arrived, in these talks, at the foot of a high mountain that, almost like
chopped rock, she was alone among many others that surrounded her. Ran for his
skirt a gentle stream, and there was a meadow so green
and vicious, that made the eyes that looked at him happy. There was over there
many wild trees and some plants and flowers, which made the place
peaceful. This site chose the Knight of the Sad Figure to make its
penance; and thus, seeing him, she began to say aloud, as if
was without judgment:
-This is the place, oh dear, that I choose and choose to mourn the
misfortune in which you have put me. This is the place where
the humor of my eyes will increase the waters of this little stream, and my
continuous and deep breaths will move the leaves of these
mountainous trees, in testimony and a sign of the pain that my asendereado
heart suffers. O ye, whoever you are, rustic gods who in
this uninhabitable place you have your abode, hear the complaints of this
unfortunate lover, whom a long absence and imagined jealousy have
brought to lament amidst these rough edges, and to complain about the harsh
condition of that ungrateful and beautiful, end and end of all human
loveliness! O you Napeas and Dryads, who are in the habit of
dwell in the thickets of the mountains, so the light and lascivious satyrs,
of whom you are, although in vain, beloved, never disturb your sweet
calm, that you help me to regret my misfortune, or, at least, do not
get tired of oil! Oh Dulcinea del Toboso, day of my night, glory of my
sorrow, north of my ways, star of my fortune, so heaven gives it to you
good as soon as you are right to ask, that you consider the place and the state to
that your absence has led me, and that with good term you correspond to the one who
it is due to my faith! Oh lonely trees, that from now on
you have to keep my loneliness company, give a hint, with the soft
movement of your branches, do not displease my presence! Oh you
Squire of mine, pleasant companion in more prosperous and adverse events, take
well in the memory what you will see me do here, so you can tell it and
prescribe to the total cause of it all!
And, saying this, he got out of Rocinante, and in a moment he released the brake and
the chair; and, slapping him on the haunches, he said:
-Freedom gives you whoever is left without it, oh horse so shaken by your
works how miserable for your luck! Go where you want, that in the
You have written on your forehead that Astolfo's Hippogriff did not equal you in lightness,
nor the named Frontinus, who cost Bradamante so dearly.
Seeing this, Sancho said:
-Well, there are those who have now removed us from the work of un saddling the roe; that
By faith there will be no lack of patting that you give, or things that you say in your
praise; but if he were here, I would not allow anyone to
desalbardara, because there was no reason, that he did not have the general
in love or in despair, because his master was not, who was me,
when God wanted. And indeed, Mr. Knight of the Sad Figure, that
if it is that my departure and his madness of your mercy is really going, that will be
It is good to saddle Rocinante again, so that he can make up for the lack of the rocket,
because it will save time on my way back and forth; that if I do it on foot, I don't know
When will I arrive or when will I return, because, in resolution, I am a bad walker.
`` I mean, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` let it be as you want it, don't let me.
your design seems wrong; and I say that in three days you will leave, because
I want you to see at this time what I do for her and say, so that she
you say.
"Well, what more have I to see," said Sancho, "than what I have seen?"
- Well you're in the story! Don Quixote answered. Now I need to rip
the clothes, scatter the weapons and give myself of pumpkins by these rocks,
with other things from this time that you have to admire.
"For God's sake," said Sancho, "may your grace look at how these
squash; that he will be able to reach such a rock, and at such a point, that with the
first the machine of this penance was finished; and it would seem that,
since your grace seems to him that they are necessary here dressed up and that
You cannot do this work without them, be content, because all this is
feigned and twisted and mocking, be content, I mean, with giving them in
water, or something soft, like cotton; and leave the charge to me, that
I will tell my lady that your grace gave it to her at one more rock point
hard than a diamond.
`` I thank you for your good intention, friend Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` but
I want to make you aware that all these things I do are not made fun of,
but very truly; because otherwise, it would be to contravene the orders
cavalry, who tell us not to tell a lie, penalty of
Relasos, and doing one thing for another is the same as lying. I crave that, my
gourd must be true, firm and valid, without wearing anything
from the sophistical or from the fantastic. And it will be necessary that you leave me some
licks to heal me, because luck would have us lack the balsam
that we lost.
`` It was more like losing the donkey, '' answered Sancho, `` because the
hilas and everything. And I beg your mercy not to remember more of that
damn brew; that just hearing him mentions my soul turns, not that he
stomach. And more I beg you: to realize that the three days are already past
that has given me an end to see the crazy things that he does, that I already give them by
views and past in res judicata, and I will say wonders to my lady; and
write the letter and dismiss me later, because I have a great desire to return to
bring at your mercy from this purgatory where I left him.
"Are you calling him Purgatory, Sancho?" said Don Quixote. You better do
call it hell, and even worse, if there is something else that is.
`` Who has hell, '' answered Sancho, `` is null and void, as I have heard.
tell.
"I don't understand what retention means," said Don Quixote.
`` Retention is, '' answered Sancho, `` that whoever is in hell never leaves.
him, nor can he. Which will be the other way around at your mercy, or they will walk me
bad feet, if I wear spurs to fan Rocinante; and put me
I one by one in Toboso, and in front of my lady Dulcinea, that I
I will say such things of foolishness and folly, that everything is one, that your
mercy has done and remains doing, that he come to make her softer than a
glove, even if it is harder than a cork oak; with whose answer
sweet and melified I will return in the air, as a witch, and I will bring out your
Mercy of this purgatory, which looks like hell and is not, because there is hope
to leave him, which, as I have said, those who
They are in hell, nor do I think your grace will say otherwise.
"This is the truth," said the one with the Sad Figure; but what will we do to
Write the letter?
"And the pollinesca draft as well," added Sancho.
"Everything will be inserted," said Don Quixote; and it would be nice, since there is no paper,
that we write it, as the ancients did, on tree leaves, or on
some wax tablets; Although it will be so difficult to find that now as
paper. But it has already come to my memory where it will be good, and even more than
Well, write: that it is in the memory book that was Cardenio's; and
you will be careful to have it transferred on paper, in good handwriting, in the
first place you find, where there is a boys' school teacher, or if
no, any sacristan will transfer it to you; and do not give it to transfer to
no scribe, who make processed letters, who will not understand Satan.
-Well, what is to be done with the firm? -said Sancho.
"Amadís's letters are never signed," answered Don Quixote.
`` It is fine, '' answered Sancho, `` but the draft must necessarily be
sign, and that one, if it moves, they will say that the signature is false and I will be left without
pollinos.
-The draft will go in the same signed booklet; that, seeing her, my niece
it will not make it difficult for you to comply. And when it comes to the love letter,
you will put by signature: "Yours until death, the Knight of the Sad
Figure ". And it will do little to the case that it goes from someone else's hand, because, to what I
I know how to remember, Dulcinea cannot write or read, and in all her life she has seen
my letter or my letter, because my loves and yours have always been
Platonists, without stretching to more than an honest look. And even this so
from time to time, that I will dare to swear truthfully that in twelve years that
I want more than the fire of those eyes that have to eat the earth, I have not
seen four times; and it may still be that four times there was no she
missed seeing the one who was looking at her: such is the modesty and confinement with
that her parents, Lorenzo Corchuelo, and her mother, Aldonza Nogales, have
raised.
-Ta, ta! Sancho said. That Lorenzo Corchuelo's daughter is Mrs.
Dulcinea del Toboso, called by another name Aldonza Lorenzo?
"That is it," said Don Quixote, "and she is the one who deserves to be mistress of the whole world."
universe.
`` I know her well, '' said Sancho, `` and I can say that she throws a bar as well as
the strongest boy in town. Long live the Giver, who is a wench
veneer, full-fledged and with hair on his chest, and that he can pull the beard out of the
mud to any knight errant, or to walk, who has her as a lady!
Oh you whore, what a laugh she has, and what a voice! I know how to say that one day
above the bell tower of the village to call some of his trainees who walked in
fallow land of his father, and although they were from there more than half a league, so
they heard it as if they were at the foot of the tower. And the best thing you have is
that she is not at all picky, because she has much of a courtesan: with everyone she
he mocks and makes a face and grace of everything. Now I say, Mister Knight of the
Sad Figure, that not only can and should your grace do crazy things
for her, but, with a just title, he can despair and hang himself; that
There will be no one who knows who does not say that he did too much good, since
the devil takes him. And I would like to see myself on the way, just by vella; what has
many days that I do not see it, and it must already be bartered, because it spends a lot
the face of women always walk in the field, in the sun and in the air. And I confess
a truth at your mercy, Mr. Don Quixote: that up to now I have been in
great ignorance; who thought well and faithfully that Mrs. Dulcinea
it must be some princess with whom your grace was in love, or
some such person, who deserved the rich presents that your grace will
has sent: both that of the Biscayan as well as that of the galley slaves, and many others who
must be, as there must be many victories that your grace has
won and won in time that I was not yet his squire. But well
Considered, what is to be given to Mrs. Aldonza Lorenzo, I mean, at the
Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, that they are going to kneel in front of you
della the defeated ones that your grace sends him and has to send? Because
it could be that, by the time they arrived, she was raking
flax, or threshing in the ages, and they ran to see her, and she
laugh and be angry at the present.
"I have told you many times before now, Sancho," said Don Quixote,
that you are a very big talker, and that, although I bounce wit, many times
sharp edges. But, so that you can see how foolish you are and how discreet
It's me, I want you to hear me a short story. «Know that a widow
beautiful, wench, free and rich, and, above all, carefree, she fell in love with a
Motilón waiter, plump and of good volume. Get him to know his eldest, and one day
he said to the good widow, by way of brotherly rebuke:
I am, madam, and not without much cause, that such a leading woman, so
beautiful and as rich as your grace, has fallen in love with a man so
coarse, as short and as stupid as so-and-so, having in this house so many
teachers, so many presented and so many theologians, in whom your mercy
I could choose as between pears, and say: "This one I want, this one I don't
I want to. "'' But she replied, with much grace and ease:
`` Your grace, my lord, is very deluded, and thinks very old-fashioned
If you think that I have chosen the wrong guy, for an idiot that you think, well,
For what I love him, he knows as much philosophy, and more, than Aristotle '' ».
So, Sancho, for what I love Dulcinea del Toboso, so much worth
as the highest princess on earth. Yes, not all poets who
praise ladies, under a name that they at their will give them, it is
they really do. Do you think that the Amariles, the Phillies, the
Silvias, the Dianas, the Galateas, the Alidas and others such that the
books, romances, barbers' shops, theaters of
comedies, they are full, they were truly flesh and blood ladies, and of
those who celebrate and celebrate them? No, by the way, but the most are
they fake them, to give subject to their verses and because they consider them to be in love
and by men who have the courage to be. And so, it is enough for me to think and
believe that good old Aldonza Lorenzo is beautiful and honest; and in the
lineage matters little, that they should not go to make the information of him to give
some habit, and I realize that she is the tallest princess in the world.
Because you have to know, Sancho, if you don't know, that two things alone incite
love more than others, which are great beauty and good fame; and these two
things are consummately found in Dulcinea, because in being beautiful no
equals him, and in good reputation, few reach him. And to conclude with everything,
I imagine that everything I say is like that, without anything missing or over; and
I paint it in my imagination as I desire it, in beauty as well as in
principality, and it is not reached by Elena, nor by Lucrecia, nor by any other
of the famous women of the past ages, Greek, barbarian or Latin.
And let each one say what he wants; that if for this he was reprimanded by the
ignorant, I will not be punished by the rigorous.
`` I say that your grace is right in everything, '' answered Sancho, `` and that I
I am an ass. But I do not know why I name an ass in my mouth, because it is not
to put the rope in the house of the hanged man. But come the letter, and God, let me
Mute.
He took out the memory book Don Quixote, and, moving aside, by far
calmly began to write the letter; and, on finishing it, he called Sancho and told him
He said that he wanted to read it to him, because he would take it by heart, if
lost on the way, because of his misery everything could be feared. To what
which Sancho answered:
-Write it your grace two or three times there in the book and give me, that I
I will keep it well guarded, because to think that I have to take it in memory
It is nonsense: that I have it so bad that many times I forget how I
I call. But, with all that, your grace tell me, that I will take great pleasure in
Oílla, which must be like a mold.
"Listen, that's what he says," said Don Quixote:
Letter from Don Quixote to Dulcinea del Toboso
Sovereign and high lady:
The hiatus of absence and the wounding of the fabrics of the heart,
Sweet Dulcinea del Toboso, sends you the health that he does not have. If you
fermosura despises me, if your value is not in my favor, if your disdain is in
my settlement, maguer that I am so much suffered, I will not be able to sustain myself in
this care, which, in addition to being strong, is very durable. My good squire
Sancho will give you a whole relationship, oh beautiful ungrateful, beloved enemy of mine!
so that for your sake I remain. If you like to run me, I am yours; if not,
do what you want; that, with my life ending, I will have satisfied
your cruelty and my desire.
Yours until death
The Knight of the Sad figure.
"For the life of my father," said Sancho, hearing the letter, "which is the highest
thing I've never heard. Regret me, and how does your grace say there
everything he wants, and how well he fits into the firm El Caballero de la
Sad Figure! I really say that the devil himself is your mercy, and that
There is nothing that I do not know.
"Everything is necessary," answered Don Quixote, "for the office that I bring."
`` Come on, then, '' said Sancho, `` put your favor in this other round the certificate of
the three pollinos and sign it very clearly, because they know it in
watching her.
"May it please me," said Don Quixote.
And, having written it, he read it to him; that said there:
Your grace will send, for this first chick, Mrs. Niece, to give
Sancho Panza, my squire, three of the five that I left at home and are
charge of your mercy. Which three chicks I send them free and
pay for as many here received in cash, which consists, and with its
letter of payment will be well given. Date in the bowels of Sierra Morena, a
August twenty-two this year.
"It's good," said Sancho; sign it your grace.
`` It is not necessary to sign it, '' said Don Quixote, `` but only to put my
signature, which is the same as signing, and for three donkeys, and even for
three hundred was enough.
"I trust your mercy," answered Sancho. Let me go saddle up
to Rocinante, and your grace may come to give me your blessing, that later
I intend to leave, without seeing the nonsense that your grace has to do, that
I will say that I saw him do so many that he does not want more.
-At least I want to, Sancho, and because it is necessary to do so, I want, I say, that
see me naked, and do a dozen or two crazy things, which I will do in
less than half an hour, because, having seen them through your eyes, you can
swear to your safe in the others that you want to add; and make sure not
you will say as many as I intend to do.
"For God's sake, my lord, may I not see naked at your mercy,
I will feel very sorry and I will not be able to stop crying; and I have such a head,
of the crying that I did last night for the gray, that I am not here to get into
new cries; and if your grace likes me to see some
crazy things, make them dressed, brief and those that come to mind more. How much
more, that for me I did not need anything deso, and, as I have already said, outside
save the way of my return, which has to be with the news that your
mercy desires and deserves. And if not, leave Senora Dulcinea; if not
Respond as is reason, I vote I solene to whom I can that I have
elicit the stomach's good response to kicks and slaps. Because where
it must be suffered that a knight errant, as famous as your grace,
go crazy, without what or for what, for one ...? Don't make me say the
ma'am, because by God let him rant and turn it all to twelve, although he never
be sold. Nice is me for that! Mal knows me! Well, by faith that if I
knew, fasted me!
`` By faith, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` it seems that you are no longer there.
sane than me.
"I'm not that crazy," Sancho answered, "but I'm more angry." But,
Leaving this aside, what is your grace to eat as long as you
i come back? Should he go out on the road, like Cardenio, to take it away from the
pastors?
Don Quixote replied, Do not feel sorry for that care, because, even if I had,
I would not eat anything other than herbs and fruits that this meadow and these trees
give me, that the fineness of my business is not to eat and to do other
equivalent roughness.
-God, then. But do you know what I fear? That I do not have to be right
to return to this place where I have left him, as he is in hiding.
`` Take the signs well, I'll try not to stray from these contours, '' he said.
Don Quixote-, and I will still be careful to climb these highest cliffs,
to see if I discover you when you return. The more, the more successful
It will be, so that you do not err and get lost, that you cut some broom from the
many that there are around here and you put them from time to time, until
go out in the open, which will serve as milestones and signals so that I
find them when you return, in imitation of the thread of the labyrinth of Theseus.
"I will," answered Sancho Panza.
And, cutting some, he asked his lord's blessing, and, not without many
tears of both, said goodbye to him. And, climbing over Rocinante, to
whom Don Quixote commended much, and who looked for him as for his own
person, set out across the plain, scattering the
branches of the broom, as his master had advised him. And so he left
although Don Quixote still bothered him to see him even do two
crazy things. But he had not walked a hundred steps, when he returned and said:
-I say, sir, that your grace has said very well: that, so that I can
swear without conscience that I have seen him do crazy things, it will be well that
see even one, although very large I have seen it in the meeting of your
mercy.
- Didn't I tell you? said Don Quixote. Wait, Sancho, that in a creed
I will do it.
And, stripping off his breeches in haste, he was left in flesh and diapers,
and then, without further ado, struck two shoes in the air and two graves, the
head down and feet up, discovering things that, for not seeing
Once, Sancho turned the rein to Rocinante and was satisfied and satisfied
that he could swear that his master was going mad. And so, we will let go of your
way, until the return, which was brief.
Chapter XXVI. Where the fine things that he did as a lover are continued
Quijote in Sierra Morena
And, retelling what the one with the Sad Figure did after he saw himself
alone, the story says that, just as Don Quixote finished giving the graves or
turns, half naked and half dressed, and that he saw that
Sancho had left without wanting to wait to see more nonsense, he climbed on
a point of a high rock and there he returned to think what other times
he had thought, without ever having resolved on it. And it was that what would it be
better and it would be more relevant: imitate Roldán in wild follies
that he did, or Amadís in the malenconics. And, speaking to each other, he said:
-If Roldán was such a good gentleman and as brave as everyone says, what
wonder ?, Well, at last, he was enchanted and no one could kill him if he were not
sticking a white pin through the sole of his foot, and he always brought
shoes with seven iron soles. Although they were not worth tricks against
Bernardo del Carpio, who understood them and drowned him in his arms,
Roncesvalles. But, leaving bravery aside, let's come to
the thing about losing his mind, which is true that he lost him, because of the signs that
found in the fountain and by the news that the pastor gave him that Angelica
he had slept more than two naps with Medoro, a long-haired andirlo
curly and page of Agramante; And if he understood that this was true and that
his lady had made a mess of him, he didn't do much to go mad. But
I, how can I imitate him in crazy things, if I don't imitate him on the occasion
dellas? Because my Dulcinea del Toboso I will dare to swear that she has not seen in
Every day of his life someone Moor, there as he is, in his same suit,
and that she is today like the mother who gave birth to her; and I would make him manifest grievance
if, imagining something else from it, I went crazy from that kind of madness
of Roldán the furious. On the other hand, I see that Amadís de Gaula, without losing
the trial and without doing crazy things, he achieved as much fame of love as the one who
plus; because what he did, according to his story, was not more than, to be seen
disdained of his mistress Oriana, who had commanded him not to appear before
his presence until it was his will, that he retired to the Peña Pobre
in the company of a hermit, and there he got tired of crying and entrusting himself to
God, until heaven fell upon him, in the midst of his greatest care and
need. And if this is true, as it is, why do I want to take
I work now to undress myself completely, nor to give grief to these trees,
that they have not done me any harm? Nor do I have to muddy the clear water
these streams, which have to give me to drink when I feel like it. Live
the memory of Amadís, and be imitated by Don Quixote de la Mancha in all
who could; of which it will be said what was said of the other: that if it did not end
great things, died by acometellas; and if I am not rejected or scorned
from Dulcinea del Toboso, it is enough for me, as I have said, to be absent from her. Ea,
then, let's get to work: come to my memory, things of Amadis, and teach me by
where do I start to imitate you. But I already know that the most he did was
pray and entrust yourself to God; but, what will I make of rosario, that I don't have?
In this he came to the thought of how he would do it, and it was that he tore a large strip
of the skirts of the shirt, which were hanging, and gave eleven knots, the
one fatter than the others, and this served as a rosary for the time that
he was, where he prayed a million Hail Marys. And what made him very tired was
not to find another hermit there who would confess him and with whom to console himself. AND
thus, he amused himself by strolling through the meadow, writing and recording
the bark of the trees and the fine sand many verses, all
accommodated to their sadness, and some in praise of Dulcinea. But those who know
They were able to find integers and that they could be read, after he
found, they were not more than these that are followed here:
Trees, herbs and plants
that in this place you are,
so tall, green and so many,
if you do not enjoy my evil,
listen to my holy complaints.
My pain does not disturb you,
although more terrible,
Well, to pay you cleavage,
here don Quixote cried
Dulcinea's absences
of the Toboso.
This is the place where
the most loyal lover
he hides from his mistress,
and it has come to so much evil
without knowing how or where.
Bring love to the strict,
that he is of a very bad breed;
and so on, until filling a pot,
here don Quixote cried
Dulcinea's absences
of the Toboso.
Looking for the adventures
through the hard rocks,
cursing hard guts,
that between cliffs and between bushes
find the sad misadventures,
love struck him with its scourge,
not with its soft strap;
and, in touching the neck,
here don Quixote cried
Dulcinea's absences
of the Toboso.
It did not cause little laughter in those who found the referred verses the addition
del Toboso to the name of Dulcinea, because they imagined that he must have imagined
Don Quixote, if, in naming Dulcinea, he did not also say del Toboso,
the couplet could not be understood; and that was the truth, like him later
confessed. Many others wrote, but, as has been said, they could not
take out clean, not whole, plus three couplets. In this, and in sighing
and in calling the fauns and sylvans of those forests, the nymphs of
the rivers, to the painful and humid Echo, who would respond, comfort and
listened, he entertained himself, and in looking for some herbs with which to sustain
while Sancho returned; that, if as it took three days, it took three
weeks, the Knight of the Sad Figure will be so disfigured that he will not
knew the mother who gave birth to him.
And it will be good to leave him, wrapped between his sighs and verses, to tell what
that happened to Sancho Panza in his errand. And it was that, in going out to the
On the royal road, he set out in search of El Toboso, and another day he came to the sale where
the blanket misfortune had befallen him; and he had not seen it well, when
It seemed to him that he was walking in the air again, and he did not want to go inside,
Although it came at a time when it could and should be done, because it was the time to eat and
carry in desire to taste something hot; that there were great days that everything
it was stiff.
This need forced him to come next to the sale, still doubtful if
would enter or not. And, while at this, two people came out of the sale who
then they met him; and said to each other:
-Tell me, Mr. Graduate, the one with the horse, isn't it Sancho Panza, the one
said the mistress of our adventurer who had gone out with his lord for
squire?
"Yes, it is," said the lawyer; and that is the horse of our Don Quixote.
And they knew him as well as those who were the priest and the barber of his
same place, and those who did the scrutiny and general act of the books.
Which, just as they had just met Sancho Panza and Rocinante,
Desiring to know about Don Quixote, they went to him; and the priest called him about his
name, saying:
"Friend Sancho Panza, where is your master?"
Then Sancho Panza met them, and determined to cover up the place and the fate
where and how his master was; and thus, he replied that his master was
occupied in a certain part and in a certain thing that was of great importance to him,
which he could not discover, because of the eyes on his face.
"No, no," said the barber, "Sancho Panza; if you don't tell us where it is,
we will imagine, as we have already imagined, that you have died and stolen from him,
you come on top of his horse. In truth, you have to give us the owner of the
nag, or about that, brunette.
-There is no reason why you threaten me, that I am not a man who steals or kills
no one: kill each one his luck, or God, who made him. My master remains
doing penance in the middle of this mountain, very much to his taste.
And then, running and nonstop, he told them about the luck that remained, the
adventures that had happened to him and how he carried the letter to Mrs.
Dulcinea del Toboso, who was the daughter of Lorenzo Corchuelo, whose
in love to the livers.
They were both amazed at what Sancho Panza was telling them; and, although already
knew Don Quixote's madness and the genre of it, whenever they heard it they
they admired again. They asked Sancho Panza to show them the letter that
He was carrying Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso. He said it was written on a
memory book and that it was her lord's order to have her transferred in
paper in the first place it arrived; to which the priest said to
show, that he would translate it in very good handwriting. He put his hand in the
bosom Sancho Panza, looking for the booklet, but did not find it, nor could it
find if I looked for him until now, because Don Quixote had stayed with
him and it had not been given to him, nor did he remember to ask for it.
When Sancho saw that he could not find the book, the
face; and, turning to tempt the whole body very hastily,
see that I could not find him; and, without further ado, he clasped both fists at the
beards and tore off half of them, and then, hastily and unceasingly, gave
half a dozen handfuls to his face and nostrils, which he bathed
all in blood. Seen which by the priest and the barber, they told him that what
It had happened to him, how badly he stood.
"What will happen to me," answered Sancho, "if not having lost a
hand to another, on a shelf, three chicks, each one like a
Castle?
-How is that? replied the barber.
`` I have lost the memory book, '' answered Sancho, `` where a letter came to
Dulcinea and a signed document from her lord, by which she ordered that her
niece gave me three chicks, four or five who were at home.
And, with this, he told them about the loss of the red deer. The priest consoled him and said
that, finding his master, he would make him revalidate the command and return to
make the draft on paper, as was the custom and custom, because those that are
They were made in memory books, they were never met or complied with.
With this, Sancho consoled himself, and said that, as it were, that
It was very sad to lose Dulcinea's letter, because he knew it almost
memory, from which they could move wherever and whenever they wanted.
"Decildo, Sancho, then," said the barber, "we'll move her later."
Sancho Panza stopped to scratch his head to recall the letter, and
Now he stood on one foot, and now on another; sometimes I looked at the ground,
others to heaven; and, after having gnawed half a fingertip,
having suspensions to those who expected him to say it already, he said after
great time:
-God, Mr. Graduate, the devils take the thing that the letter
it reminds me; although in the beginning it said: "Tall and sober lady."
"I would not say," said the barber, "humbled, but superhuman or sovereign lady."
"That's right," Sancho said. Then, if I don't remember badly, I would continue ... if I don't remember badly
I remember: «he arrived and lacking sleep, and the ferido kisses at your mercy
hands, ungrateful and very unknown beautiful, "and I don't know what he said about health and
of disease that it sent him, and it was trickling around here, until it
in "Yours until death, the Knight of the Sad Figure."
Not a little they both liked to see the good memory of Sancho Panza, and
They praised her very much, and asked her to say the letter two more times, to
that they, anxiously, took it by heart to transfer it to their time.
Sancho said it again three times, and as many times he said again
another three thousand nonsense. After this, he also recounted the things of his master,
but he did not speak a word about the maintenance that had happened to him in
that sale, in which he refused to enter. He also said as his lord, in
bringing him a good office from Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, he
was to set out to seek how to be emperor, or, at least,
monarch; that they had it arranged between the two of them, and it was a very easy thing
come to be, according to the value of his person and the strength of his arm; and
that, being so, she had to marry him, because he would already be a widower,
could be less, and he was to give a maiden of the
empress, heir to a rich and great land state, without
Islands or islands, I no longer wanted them.
Sancho said this with so much rest, cleaning himself from time to time
noses, and with so little judgment, that the two admired each other again,
considering how vehement Don Quixote's madness had been, for he had
brought with him the judgment of that poor man. They did not want to tire in
get him out of the mistake he was in, seeming to them that, since he was not hurting anything
conscience, it was better to leave him in it, and they would be more pleased
hear their foolishness. And so they told him to pray to God for the health of his
sir, what a contingent and very agile thing it was to come, with the speech of the
time, to be emperor, as he said, or, at least, archbishop, or another
equivalent dignity. To which Sancho replied:
-Sirs, if fortune surrounded things in such a way that my master would
wishing not to be an emperor, but to be an archbishop, I would like to know
Now, what do erring archbishops usually give their squires?
`` They usually give them, '' replied the priest, `` some benefit, simple or cured, or
some sacristan, which is worth a lot of rented income, in addition to the foot of
altar, which is usually estimated to be the same.
`` For that it will be necessary, '' Sancho replied, `` that the squire is not married and
who knows how to help mass, at least; and if this is so, wretched me,
I'm married and I don't know the first letter of ABC! What will happen to me if to me
master gives him the desire to be archbishop, and not emperor, as is custom and custom
of the knights errant?
`` Don't be sorry, Sancho my friend, '' said the barber, `` here we will pray to
your master and we will advise you, and we will even give it to you in case of
conscience, that he be an emperor and not an archbishop, because it will be easier for him,
cause he is braver than student.
`` That's how it seemed to me, '' answered Sancho, `` although I know how to say that for everything
has skill. What I intend to do on my part is to beg Our
Lord, let him go to those parts where he serves himself the most and where he works the most for me.
Mercedes make me.
"You say it as discreet," said the priest, "and you will do it as a good Christian."
But what now has to be done is to give order how to get your master out of
that useless penance that you say you are doing; and, to think the
way that we have to have, and to eat, that it is time, it will be well for us
Let's get into this sale.
Sancho told them to come in, that he would wait out there and then
He would tell them why he did not enter or it was convenient for him to enter it; more
that he begged them to get him something to eat there that was something hot,
and, anxiously, barley for Rocinante. They entered and left him, and
there little by little, the barber took him out to eat. After, having thought well
between the two of them the way they would have to get what they wanted, came the
cure in a thought very accommodated to the taste of Don Quixote and for what
They wanted. And it was that he told the barber that what he had thought was that
he would dress in the habit of a walking maiden, and that he
better than he could as a squire, and that they would go where Don Quixote was,
pretending to be a distressed and needy maiden, and would ask her for a
gift, which he could not fail to bestow upon him, as a valiant knight
walking. And that the gift she was thinking of asking was for him to come with her
where she took him, to dishonor him a wrong that a bad gentleman
was dated; and that she begged him, anxiously, not to order her to remove her
mask, nor did he demand something from his estate, it was possible that he had dated it
right of that bad gentleman; and that he believed, without a doubt, that Don Quixote
He would come in whatever he asked for this term; and in this way
They would take him out of there and take him to his place, where they would try to see if he had
some remedy for his strange madness.
Chapter XXVII. How the priest and the barber came out with their intention, with
other things worth telling in this great story
The barber did not find the priest's invention bad, but so good that
then they put it to work. They asked the innkeeper for a skirt and some headdresses,
leaving him a new cassock for the priest. The barber made a great
beard of an oxtail or red tail, where the innkeeper had hung the
hair comb. The landlord asked them why they asked those things for. The
The priest told him briefly about Don Quixote's madness, and how it was
that disguise to get him out of the mountain, where he was at the time. Fell
then the innkeeper and the innkeeper in which the madman was his guest, that of the
balsam, and the master of the battered squire, and they told the priest everything
he had passed them by, without keeping silent about what Sancho was so silent about. In resolution,
the innkeeper dressed the priest so that there was nothing more to see: put a skirt on him
of cloth, full of black velvet sashes a foot wide, all
stabbed, and green velvet bodices trimmed with
white satin trims, which must have been made, they and the skirt, in
time of King Wamba. The priest did not consent to being touched, but put himself in
his head a quilted canvas cap which he wore when sleeping
night, and girded a garter of black taffeta around his forehead, and with another garter
he made a mask, with which he covered his beard and face very well;
he put on his hat, which was so big that it could be used as a
sunshade, and, covering his blue tit, he mounted his mule to womanizers, and the
barber in his, with his beard that reached to his waist, between red and
white, like that which, as has been said, was made from the tail of an ox
muddy.
They said goodbye to everyone, and to good old Maritornes, who promised to pray
a rosary, even if sinful, because God gave them good success in such arduous
and as Christian a business as it was that they had undertaken.
But, as soon as it had left the sale, when a thought came to the priest:
that he was wrong to have put himself that way, for being an indecent thing
for a priest to be like that, even if he was very hard at it; and,
telling the barber, he begged him to barter suits, as it was fairer
that he was the needy maiden, and that he would be the squire, and that so
his dignity was less profaned; and that if he did not want to do it, he determined
not go ahead, even if Don Quixote was taken by the devil.
In this, Sancho arrived, and seeing the two in that suit he could not have the
laughter. In effect, the barber came in everything that the priest wanted, and,
bartering the invention, the priest informed him of the way he had to
and the words he had to say to Don Quixote to move him and force him to
that he would come with him, and leave the love of the place he had chosen
for their vain penance. The barber replied that, without being
lition, he would put it right on point. He did not want to dress at the time,
until they were next to where Don Quixote was; and so, he doubled his
dressed, and the priest adjusted his beard, and they continued on their way, leading them
Sancho Panza; which was telling them what happened to the madman who
found in the mountains, concealing, however, the discovery of the suitcase and
how much in it came; that, maguer what a fool, he was a little greedy the
young man.
Another day they came to the place where Sancho had left the signs of
the branches to guess the place where he had left his master; and in
recognizing him, he told them how that was the entrance, and how well they could
dress, if that was appropriate for the freedom of his lord;
because they had told him before that to go like that and dress
in that way it was all the importance to get his master out of that bad
life that he had chosen, and that he was charged with not telling his master
who they were, or who knew them; And what if I asked him how
had to ask, if you gave the letter to Dulcinea, say yes, and that, for
not knowing how to read, he had responded by word of mouth, telling him that he sent him,
under pain of her misfortune, that then at the moment he came to see her,
that it was something that mattered a lot to him; because with this and with what they
thought to tell him they had the certain thing to reduce him to a better life, and to do with
he who then set out to become emperor or monarch; what in
there was nothing to fear about being an archbishop.
Sancho heard everything, and took it very well in memory, and thanked them
much the intention they had to advise their lord to be emperor and not
Archbishop, because he had for himself that, to do favors to his
squires, the emperors could do more than the errant archbishops. Too
He told them that it would be good for him to go ahead to find him and give him the
reply from his mistress, that she would be enough to get him out of that
place, without them putting in so much work. They seemed fine what
Sancho Panza said, and thus, they determined to wait for him until he returned
with the news of his master's discovery.
Sancho entered through those ravines of the sierra, leaving the two in
one where a small and gentle stream ran, who was shaded
nice and cool other rocks and some trees that were there. The
heat, and the day they arrived there was one of the month of August, which
those parts is usually very great burning; the hour, three o'clock
afternoon: all of which made the place more pleasant, and that he invited
he waited for Sancho's return, as they did.
So while the two of them were there, calm and in the shade, a
voice that, unaccompanied, are of some other instrument, sweet and
it sounded delightfully, that they were not a little admired, for it seemed to them that
It was not a place where there could be someone who sang so well. Because although
It is often said that in the jungles and fields there are shepherds of voices
shocked, they are more expensive for poets than truths; and more when
They noticed that what they heard singing were verses, not of rustic cattlemen,
but of discreet courtiers. And confirmed this truth to have been the verses
what did they hear:
Who impairs my assets?
Disdain.
And who increases my duels?
Jealousy.
And who tests my patience?
Absence.
Thus, in my ailment
no remedy is reached,
well they kill my hope
disdain, jealousy and absence.
Who is causing me this pain?
Love.
And who my glory disgusts?
Fortune.
And who consents to my duel?
Heaven
In this way, I am suspicious
die of this evil stranger,
because they increase in my damage,
love, fortune and heaven.
Who will improve my luck?
Death.
And the good of love, who reaches him?
Moving.
And their ills, who cures them?
Craziness.
That way it's not sanity
want to cure passion
when the remedies are
death, moving and madness.
The hour, the time, the loneliness, the voice and the dexterity of the one who sang caused
admiration and contentment in the two listeners, who remained,
waiting if they heard something else; but, seeing that the
silence, they determined to go looking for the musician who with such a good voice
sang. And, wanting to put it into effect, he made the same voice that he did not
moviesen, which reached his ears again, singing this sonnet:
Sonnet
Holy friendship, that with light wings,
your appearance staying on the ground,
between blessed souls, in heaven,
joyfully you went up to the unholy halls,
from there, when you want, you point us
the just peace covered with a veil,
for whom zeal sometimes shines through
of good works that, in the end, are bad.
Leave heaven, oh friendship, or do not allow
let deception wear your livery,
with which it destroys the sincere intention;
that if your appearances do not take away,
soon the world must be seen in the fight
of the first discordant confusion.
The song ended with a deep sigh, and the two of them, with attention,
they waited again if more was sung; but, seeing that the music had
turned into sobs and pitiful woes, they remembered to know who he was
sad, as shocked in the voice as painful in the moans; and no
They walked a lot, when, on returning from a tip of a rock, they saw a
man of the same size and figure that Sancho Panza had painted them when
he told them the story of Cardenio; which man, when he saw them, without
startled, he stood, his head bent over his chest as if
of a pensive man, without raising his eyes to look at them more than the first time,
when suddenly they arrived.
The priest, who was a well-spoken man (like the one who already had news of his
unfortunately, because he had known him by signs), he came to him, and with
brief but very discreet reasons begged and persuaded him that this so
miserable life left, because there I did not lose it, which was misery
greatest of misfortunes. Cardenio was then in his entire mind, free
of that furious accident that so often took him out of himself; and so,
seeing the two in such an unused suit of those who for those loneliness
they were walking, he did not stop admiring himself somewhat, and more when he heard that they had
spoken in his business as a known thing -because the reasons that the priest
told him so they gave him to understand-; and thus, he responded in this way:
-I well see, gentlemen, whoever you are, that heaven, which has
careful to help the good, and even the bad many times, without me
deserve it, send me, in these so remote and secluded places of the deal
common to the people, some people who, putting myself in front of the eyes
with alive and various reasons how without her I walk in doing the life that I do,
They have tried to get me out of this for the better part; but since they don't know what I know
that in leaving this damage I have to fall into another greater one, perhaps they owe me
have for a man of thin speeches, and even, what would be worse, for de
no judgment. And it would not be a wonder if it were so, because I
it transpires that the force of my imagination of my misfortunes is so intense and
can so much in my downfall that, without my being able to be part of it,
I come to be like stone, lacking all good sense and knowledge; and
I come to realize this truth, when some tell me and show
signs of the things I have done while that terrible accident
lordship, and I know no more than to hurt myself in vain and curse my
good fortune, and to apologize for my follies saying the cause of them to
how many want to hear it; because, seeing the sane ones what is the cause, I do not know
They will marvel at the effects, and if they do not give me a remedy, at least I will not
blame, turning the anger of my ease into a pity for
my misfortunes. And if you, gentlemen, come with the same intention
that others have come, before you go forward in your discreet
persuasions, I beg you to listen to the story, which does not have it, of my
misadventures; because perhaps, after understanding, you will save from the work that
you will take to console an evil that is incapable of any consolation.
Both of them, who wanted nothing more than to know from his own mouth the cause of
their damage, they begged him to tell them, offering not to do anything else
that he wanted, in his remedy or consolation; and with this, the sad gentleman
began its pitiful story, almost by the same words and steps that the
had told Don Quixote and the goatherd a few days ago, when, for
occasion of the teacher Elisabat and punctuality of Don Quixote in keeping the
decorum to the cavalry, the tale remained imperfect, as history
leaves counted. But now luck would have it that the accident stopped
of madness and gave him place to tell it to the end; and thus, reaching the
pass the bill that Don Fernando had found among the Amadís book of
Gaula, Cardenio said that he remembered him well, and that he said
way:
«Luscinda to Cardenio
Every day I discover in you values ​​that oblige me and force me to
estimate; And so, if you want to get rid of this debt without executing me in the
honor, you may very well do. I have a father, who knows you and who
wants good, which, without forcing my will, will fulfill what will be fair
that you have, if you esteem me as you say and as I believe.
- »For this bill I moved to ask Luscinda for a wife, as I have already told you.
counted, and this was by whom Luscinda remained in the opinion of Don Fernando
by one of the most discreet and alert women of her time; and this
It was the ticket that made him want to destroy me, before mine was
be effected. I told Don Fernando what Luscinda's father noticed,
that it was when my father asked him, which I did not dare to say,
afraid that he would not come at it, not because he was not well known
quality, goodness, virtue and beauty of Luscinda, and that she had parts
enough to enforce any other lineage in Spain, but because I
I understood from him that he wanted me not to marry so soon, until I saw what the
Duke Ricardo did with me. In resolution, I told him I was not venturing to
tell my father, both for that inconvenience and for many others who
they cowed me, not knowing what they were, but it seemed to me that what I
wish it was never to have an effect.
"To all this, Don Fernando replied that he was in charge of speaking to me.
father and have him talk to Luscinda's. Oh ambitious Mario, oh
Cruel Catiline, oh fancy Sila, oh deceitful Galalon, oh Vellido
traitor, oh vengeful Julian, oh greedy Judas! Traitor, cruel, vengeful
and liar, what disservice had this sad man done you, that with so much
Llaneza discovered the secrets and content of her heart? What offense do you
I made? What words did I tell you, or what advice did I give you, that were not all
aimed at increasing your honor and profit? But what am I complaining about?
Unfortunate me! For it is certain that when misfortunes bring
the stream of stars, as they come from high to low, falling down with
fury and violence, there is no force on earth to stop them, nor
human industry that can prevent them. Who could imagine that don
Fernando, illustrious gentleman, discreet, obliged to my services, powerful
to achieve what the loving desire asks of him wherever he
occupied, he had to fester, as they say, in taking me a single
sheep, who did not yet own? But keep these considerations aside, like
useless and unprofitable, and let us add the broken thread of my unfortunate story.
I say, then, that, appearing to Don Fernando that my presence was
inconvenient to implement his false and bad thinking, he determined
to send me his older brother, on the occasion of asking him for some money to
pay six horses, that of industry, and just for this purpose that I
be absent (to better be able to go out with his damaged attempt), the same day that
He offered to speak to my father, he bought them, and he wanted me to come for him.
money. Could I prevent this betrayal? Could I, by any chance, fall into
imagine it? No, by the way; before, with great pleasure, I offered to leave
then happy with the good purchase made. That night I spoke to Luscinda,
and I told him what was agreed with Don Fernando, and that he had firm
hope that our good and just wishes would have an effect. She me
She said, as sure as I am of Don Fernando's betrayal, to try to
return quickly, because I believed that the conclusion of our
wills that my father took to speak to his. I don't know what left, what,
in just saying this to me, his eyes filled with tears and a knot
it pierced his throat, which did not allow him to speak a word of other
many that I thought he was trying to tell me.
»I was amazed at this new accident, never before seen in it,
because we always talked to each other, the times that good fortune and my
diligently granted it, with all rejoicing and contentment, without mixing in
our talks tears, sighs, jealousy, suspicion or fear. Everything was
I magnify my fortune, for having given it to me as a lady:
I exaggerated her beauty, I admired her courage and understanding. She came back to me
the replacement, praising in me what, as a lover, seemed worthy of
praise. With this, we counted one hundred thousand trifles and occurrences of
our neighbors and acquaintances, and what more understood my ease
was to take him, almost by force, one of his beautiful white hands, and
reach my mouth, as the narrowness of a low fence that gave us
divided. But the night that preceded the sad day of my departure, she
he cried and groaned and sighed, and was gone, leaving me full of confusion and
startled, appalled at having seen such new and sad displays of
pain and feeling in Luscinda. But, for not destroying my hopes, everything
I attributed it to the strength of the love he had for me and the pain that
absence in those who love each other well.
»Anyway, I left sad and pensive, filled my soul with imaginations and
suspicions, without knowing what I suspected or imagined: clear indications that
they showed the sad event and misfortune that was in store for me. I arrived to
place where it was sent. I gave the letters to Don Fernando's brother. I went well
received, but not properly dispatched, because he ordered me to wait, well my
disgust, eight days, and partly where the duke, his father, did not see me,
because his brother wrote to him to send him some money without his
wisdom. And it was all the invention of the false Don Fernando, because he did not lack
money to his brother to send me off later. Order and mandate was this that
He put me in a condition not to obey him, because it seemed impossible to support
so many days of life in Luscinda's absence, and more, having left her
with the sadness that I have told you; but, with all this, I obeyed, as good
servant, although I saw that it had to be at the cost of my health.
But, four days after I got there, a man came looking for me with
a letter, which he gave me, which in the superscript I knew to be from Luscinda, because
the handwriting was hers. Open it, fearful and with a start, believing that
great must have been the one that had prompted her to write to me while she was absent,
Well, present rarely did. I asked the man, before reading it,
who had given it to him and how long it had taken him on the way. Tell me
that perhaps, passing through a city street at noon, a
very beautiful lady called him from a window, her eyes filled with tears,
and that with great haste he said to him: `` Brother: if you are a Christian,
you seem, for the love of God I beg you to send this letter later
to the place and to the person who says the superscript, that everything is well known,
and in this you will do a great service to our Lord; and, so that you do not miss
comfort of being able to do it, take what goes in this handkerchief. '' ''AND,
saying this, he threw a handkerchief out the window, where they were tied
one hundred reais and this gold ring that I bring here, with that letter that I have
dice. And then, without waiting for my answer, he left the window; although
First he saw how I took the letter and the handkerchief, and, by signs, I told him that
I would do what he told me to do. And so, looking so well paid from work that
I could take it to you and knowing by the superscript that you were
who was sent, because I, sir, know you very well, and obliged
as well as the tears of that beautiful lady, I determined not to trust
of another person, but to come myself to give it to you; and in sixteen hours that
It has been given to me, I have made the way, you know that it is eighteen
leagues. ''
»While the grateful and new email told me this, I was hanging
of his words, shaking my legs so that I could barely
hold me. In fact, I opened the letter and saw that it contained these reasons:
The word that Don Fernando gave you to speak to your father so that
spoke to mine, he has fulfilled it more in his taste than in your benefit.
Know, sir, that he has asked me for a wife, and my father, taken from the
advantage that he thinks Don Fernando does to you, he has come in what he wants,
with so many truths that in two days the betrothal has to be done, so
secret and so alone, that only the heavens and some
people from home. Which I am, imagine; if it meets you to come, veldo; what if
I love you well or not, the success of this business will make you understand. Bye Bye
fold that it reaches your hands before mine is seen in condition
of joining with the one who knows so badly to keep the faith that he promises.
These, in short, were the reasons that the letter contained and those that
they were then put on the road, without waiting for another answer or other
money; how clear I knew then that I did not buy the horses,
if not the one to his liking, he had prompted Don Fernando to send his brother to me.
The anger that I conceived against Don Fernando, together with the fear of losing
garment that with so many years of services and desires I had gained, I
put wings, because, almost as in flight, another day I put myself in my place,
Time and point to go talk to Luscinda. I entered secret, and
I left a mule on which I came to the home of the good man who had brought me
letter; and luckily I had it so good then that I found
Luscinda put to the fence, witness of our loves. Luscinda met me
later, and I met her; but not how she should know me and I know her.
But who is there in the world to be praised who has penetrated and known
the confused thinking and changeable condition of a woman? None, for
certain.
"I say, then, that, just as Luscinda saw me, she said to me:" Cardenio, wedding
I'm dressed; Don Fernando the traitor is already waiting for me in the room and
my father the greedy, with other witnesses, who will be before my death
that of my betrothal. Do not be disturbed, friend, but try to find yourself present to
this sacrifice, which if it cannot be hindered from my reasons, a
I carry a hidden dagger that will be able to hinder more certain forces, ending
to my life and principle that you know the will that I have had for you and
I have''. I replied, disturbed and in a hurry, fearful I did not lack a place
to answer it: '' Make your words true, lady; that
If you carry a dagger to accredit yourself, here I carry a sword to defend you
with her or to kill me if luck be contrary to us. '' I do not think that
could hear all these reasons, because I felt that they called her hurried, because
the bridegroom was waiting. With this the night of my sadness closed, put me
the sun of my joy: I was left without light in my eyes and without speech in the
understanding. I could not enter his house, nor could I move apart
some; but, considering how much my presence mattered to what
It could happen in that case, I was encouraged as much as I could and went into his house.
And, as he already knew very well all his ins and outs, and more with the
Uproar that was secretly in it, nobody missed me. So without
be seen, I had instead of standing in the hole made by a window in the
same room, which with the ends and ends of two tapestries was covered, by
between which I could see, without being seen, everything in the room
toward.
Who could say now the startles my heart gave me while
there I was, the thoughts that occurred to me, the considerations that
I did ?, that there were so many and such, that neither can be said nor even is it good that
they say. It is enough that you know that the bridegroom entered the room without another
adornment than the same ordinary dresses she used to. He had a godfather
Luscinda's first cousin, and there was no outsider in the whole room,
but the house servants. From there to a little, he left a bedroom
Luscinda, accompanied by her mother and two of her maids, so well
seasoned and composed as their quality and beauty deserved, and as who
it was the perfection of the gala and bizarre courtesan. My
suspension and rapture so that he would look and notice in particular what
I was wearing a dress; I could only notice the colors, which were red and
white, and in the glimpses that the stones and jewels of the headdress and of the whole
dress they did, to all of which the singular beauty of their
beautiful blond hair; such that, in competition with the precious
stones and the lights of four axes that were in the room, his with
more radiance to the eyes they offered. Oh memory, mortal enemy of me
break! What is the use of representing the incomparable beauty of
that beloved enemy of mine? Wouldn't it be better, cruel memory, that you remember me
and represent what he did then, so that, moved so manifestly
wrong, try, since not revenge, at least lose your life? » No
get tired, gentlemen, of hearing these digressions that I make; that is not my pity
those that can and should not be counted succinctly and incidentally, since each
Your circumstance seems to me worthy of a long speech.
To this the priest replied that not only did they not tire of hearing him, but
they were very pleased with the trifles I told, because they were such that
deserved not to pass in silence, and the same attention that the main
story.
"" I say then, "Cardenio continued," that, with everyone in the room, the
cure of the perroquia, and, taking both by the hand to do what in
such an act is required, by saying: `` Do you want, Mrs. Luscinda, Mr.
Fernando, who is present, for your legitimate husband, as ordered by the
Holy Mother Church? '' I took my whole head and neck out of the
tapestries, and with attentive ears and troubled soul I began to listen to what
Luscinda would reply, expecting from her answer the sentence of my death or
the confirmation of my life. Oh who would dare to go out then
shouting !: `` Ah Luscinda, Luscinda, look what you do, consider
what you owe me, look that you are mine and that you cannot be someone else's! Warns
that saying yes and ending my life has to be everything to a point. Ah
traitor Don Fernando, robber of my glory, death of my life! That
want? What do you want? Consider that you cannot Christianly reach the
end of your wishes, because Luscinda is my wife and I am her husband. '' Ah
crazy of me, now that I am absent and far from danger, I say that I had to
do what I didn't do! Now that I let my face garment steal, I curse the
robber, who could avenge me if I had the heart for it like you
I have to complain! Anyway, then I was a coward and a fool, it's not much
let him die now run, repentant and crazy.
The priest was waiting for Luscinda's answer, and he stopped for a long time.
space to give it, and, when I thought he drew the dagger to credit himself, or
I unleashed my tongue to tell some truth or disappointment that to my advantage
It was redundant, I hear him say in a faint and thin voice: "Yes, I do"; and the
the same Don Fernando said; and, giving him the ring, they remained in a dissolvable knot
bound. The bridegroom came to embrace his wife, and she, putting on her
hand over her heart, she fell faint into her mother's arms. Subtraction
Now to say which one was I seeing, in the yes that I had heard, my
hopes, false the words and promises of Luscinda: unable to
collect at some time the good that at that moment had lost. I stayed
adviceless, helpless, to my mind, from all heaven, made
enemy of the earth that sustained me, denying me the air, breath for my
sighs and water humor to my eyes; only the fire increased from
so that everything burned with rage and jealousy.
'They were all in an uproar at Luscinda's fainting spell, and, unbuttoning her
mother's breast to give it air, a paper was discovered in it
closed, which Don Fernando then took and began to read by the light of one of
the axes; and, when he finished reading to her, he sat down in a chair and put on his
hand on his cheek, with signs of a very thoughtful man, without going to
remedies that were made to his wife so that she would return from fainting. Me,
seeing all the people at home in an uproar, I ventured out, now it was
seen or not, with determination that if they saw me, to do such a folly,
that the whole world came to understand the just indignation of my chest in the
punishment of the false Don Fernando, and even in the changeable
traitor. But my luck, that for greater evils, if it is possible that the
there, he must have me saved, he ordered that at that point I have
understanding that later here I have lacked; and thus, without wanting to take
revenge of my greatest enemies (who, for being so thoughtless of me,
it was easy to take it), I wanted to take it from my hand and execute in me the sorrow that
they deserved; and perhaps even more rigorously than was used with them if
then he would kill them, because the one that is received suddenly ends the
pain; but the one that expands with torments always kills, without ending life.
"Anyway, I left that house and came to the one where I had left the house.
mule; I made him saddle it, without saying goodbye to him I got on it, and left
the city, without daring, like another Lot, to turn his face to look at it; and when i
I saw in the field alone, and that the darkness of the night covered me and its
silence invited me to complain, without respect or fear of being heard or
acquaintance, I let out my voice and unleashed my tongue in so many curses from Luscinda
and Don Fernando, as if with them I satisfied the grievance they had
done. Give him titles of cruel, ungrateful, false and ungrateful; but,
above all, greedy, because the wealth of my enemy had closed it
the eyes of the will, to take it away from me and give it to him with
who more liberal and frank fortune had shown; and, in the middle of the
fled these curses and vituperations, he excused her, saying that it was not
much than a maid collected in her parents' house, made and used to
always to obey them, he would have liked to concede with his pleasure, since he
They gave for their husband such a leading gentleman, such a rich, and such a gentle man
that, not wanting to receive him, one could think, or that he had no judgment, or that
Elsewhere he had the will: a thing that was so detrimental to his
good opinion and fame. Then he would come back saying that since she said that
I was her husband, they would see that he had not done in choosing me so bad
choice, that they would not excuse it, because before don Fernando offered himself to them
could they just be right to wish, if with reason they measured their wish,
another better than me for her daughter's husband; and that she might as well, before
to put himself in the final and forced trance of shaking hands, to say that I
I had given mine; that I come and grant with all that she
will be right to pretend in this case.
»Anyway, I resolved that little love, little judgment, a lot of ambition and desires
of greatness made me forget the words with which I had
deceived, entertained and sustained in my steadfast and honest hopes
wishes. With these voices and with this restlessness I walked what was left of
that night, and at dawn in an entrance of these mountains, by the
which I walked another three days, without path or path, until I came to
stop at some meadows, which I do not know to which hand these mountains fall, and there
I asked some ranchers which way was the roughest of these mountains.
They told me that towards this part. Then I went to her, intending to
end life here, and, entering through these rough edges, fatigue and
hunger fell my dead mule, or, what I believe most, for discarding himself
as useless a burden as he carried on me. I was left on foot, exhausted from the
nature, pierced with hunger, without having, or even thinking of looking for, who
help.
"That way I was, I don't know what time, lying on the ground, after
from which I got up without hunger, and found some goatherds next to me, who,
without a doubt, they must have been the ones who remedied my need, because they
they said the way they found me, and how I was saying so many
nonsense and nonsense, which gave clear indications of having lost the
judgment; and I have felt in me, later here, that not all times I have him
complete, but so wasted and skinny that I do a thousand crazy things, ripping my
clothed, crying out in these solitudes, cursing my fortune and
repeating in vain the beloved name of my enemy, without having another speech
nor do I intend then to try to end my life by shouting; and when in me
I come back, I find myself so tired and bruised that I can hardly move. My more
common room is in the hollow of a cork oak, able to cover this
miserable body. The cowboys and goatherds that walk through these mountains,
Moved with charity, they support me, putting the delicacy on the roads and
through the rocks where they understand that perhaps I will be able to pass and find it; and so,
although then I lack the judgment, the natural necessity makes me know the
maintenance, and awakens in me the desire to desire it and the will to
take it. Other times they tell me, when they find me with judgment, that
I go out on the roads and I take it from them by force, even if they give it to me
degree, to the shepherds who come with it from the place to the sheepfolds.
»This way I spend my miserable and sad life, until heaven is
served to lead him to his last end, or to put him in my memory, so that
I do not remember the beauty and the betrayal of Luscinda and the offense of
Mr.Fernando; that if he does this without taking my life, I will come back for the better
I speak my thoughts; where no, there is nothing but to beg him that absolutely
have mercy on my soul, that I do not feel in my courage or strength to
to get the body out of that narrowness in which, for my pleasure, I have wanted to put it ».
This is, oh sirs, the bitter story of my misfortune: tell me if it is
such that it can be celebrated with less feelings than those that you have in me
viewed; and do not tire of persuading me or advising me what reason
I will say that it can be good for my remedy, because it has to take advantage of me
what takes advantage of the medicine prescribed by a famous doctor to the patient who
receive does not want it. I don't want health without Luscinda; and, well she liked
of being a stranger, being, or should be, mine, whether I like to be from the
misadventure, may have been of good fortune. She wanted, with her
move, make my undoing stable; I will want, with trying to lose myself,
do his will content, and he will be an example to those to come that I alone
what is lacking for all the unfortunate people, to whom it is usually consolation
the impossibility of having him, and in me he is the cause of greater feelings and
evils, because I still think that they are not to end with death.
Here Cardenio ended his long talk and as unfortunate as it was loving
history. And, while the priest warned himself to tell him some reasons
of consolation, he was suspended by a voice that reached his ears, which in hurt
accents heard that he said what will be said in the fourth part of this narrative,
that at this point the wise and attempted historian Cide ended the third
Hamete Benengeli.
Fourth part of the ingenious hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha
Chapter XXVIII. Which is about the new and pleasant adventure that the priest and
barber happened in the same sierra
Very happy and fortunate were the times when the
most audacious knight Don Quixote de la Mancha, for having had such a
honorable determination such as wanting to resurrect and return to the world the already
lost and almost dead order of the errant cavalry, we now enjoy, in
This is our age, in need of happy entertainment, not only
sweetness of its true story, but of the stories and episodes of it,
which, in part, are no less agreeable and contrived and true than the
same story; which, continuing its raking, twisting and reeling
thread, tells that, just as the priest began to prevent himself to comfort
Cardenio, was prevented by a voice that reached his ears, which, with sad
accents, it read like this:
-Oh my God! Is it possible that I have already found a place that can serve as
hidden burial to the heavy load of this body, that so against me
will I hold? Yes it will be, if the loneliness that these mountains promise does not
lies. Alas, unfortunate, and what more pleasant company will these cliffs and
weeds to my intention, as they will give me room for complaints to communicate
my misfortune to heaven, which is not that of any human man, for there is no
none on earth from whom you can expect advice in doubts, relief
in complaints, nor remedy in ills!
All these reasons heard and perceived by the priest and those who were with him,
and because it seemed to them, as it was, that there together they said them, they got up to
look for the owner, and they had not walked twenty steps, when behind a
cliff they saw, sitting at the foot of an ash tree, a young man dressed as
farmer, to whom, because his face was bent, because he was washing
his feet in the stream that ran through there, they could not be seen for
then. And they arrived with so much silence that they were not felt from him,
nor was he attentive to anything other than washing his feet, which were such that
they looked like nothing more than two pieces of white crystal that among the other stones
of the stream they had been born. The whiteness and beauty of the
feet, appearing to them that they were not made to tread on clods, or to walk after
the plow and oxen, as the habit of their owner showed; and so, seeing
that had not been felt, the priest, who was in front, signaled to the
two others to crouch or hide behind some pieces of rock
that there was, and they all did, looking carefully at what the
waiter did; which had on a brown cap with two haldas, very
girded to the body with a white towel. He was anxiously bringing some panties and
brown cloth leggings, and a brown cap on the head. Had the
leggings raised to the middle of the leg, which, without a doubt, of
white alabaster seemed. He finished washing the beautiful feet, and then, with
a touching cloth, which he took out from under the hood, cleaned them; and, to
wanting to take it off, he raised his face, and those who looked at him
they were to see an incomparable beauty; such, that Cardenio said to the priest,
in a low voice:
-This, since she is not Luscinda, is not a human person, but divine.
The waiter took off his hat, and, shaking his head from one side to the other,
some hair began to be uncovered and spread, which could be those of the
sun envy them. With this they learned that the one who looked like a farmer was
woman, and delicate, and even the most beautiful than until then the eyes of the
two had seen, and even those of Cardenio, if they had not looked and met
Luscinda; who later claimed that only Luscinda's beauty could
contend with it. The long blond hair not only covered him
their backs, but all around they hid it under them; if not
It was her feet, nothing else on her body looked alike: so many
were. In this, their hands served as a comb, that if their feet in the water
had looked like pieces of glass, the hands in the hair looked like
pieces of tight snow; all of which, in more admiration and in more desire
to know who she was put the three who were looking at her.
That is why they determined to show themselves, and, to the movement they made of
standing up, the beautiful girl raised her head, and, brushing her hair
from in front of his eyes with both hands, he looked at those who made the noise; and
he had scarcely seen them, when he rose to his feet, and, without waiting to put on
nor to pick up her hair, she took hold of a bundle, like clothing, with great alacrity,
that she had with her, and she wanted to flee, full of embarrassment and
shock; but he had not taken six steps when, not being able to suffer the
delicate feet the roughness of the stones, hit the ground. Which it's
Seen by the three, they came to her, and the priest was the first to say:
-Stop, lady, whoever you are, the ones you see here only have
intention to serve you. There is no reason to be so impertinent
flight, because neither your feet will be able to suffer it nor we will consent.
To all this, she did not answer a word, stunned and confused. So they arrived
her, and, grasping her by the hand, the priest continued saying:
-What your costume, madam, denies us, your hair reveals to us:
clear signs that the causes that have
disguised your beauty in a habit so unworthy, and brought it to so much
solitude such as this, in which it has been fortunate to find you, if not for
give remedy to your ills, at least to give them advice, since no
evil can be so exhausting, nor reach the extreme of being so, as long as it does not
life ends, that he refuses not even to listen to the advice that with good
intention is given to the sufferer. So, my lady, or my sir, or what
that you want to be, lose the shock that our sight has
caused and tell us your good or bad luck; that in us together, or
in each one, you will find someone to help you feel your misfortunes.
While the priest was saying these reasons, there was the disguised girl as
rapt, looking at them all, without moving her lip or saying a word:
well as a rustic villager who is suddenly shown strange things and
of him never seen. But, the priest returning to tell him other reasons at the same time
effect on their way, she gave a deep sigh, broke the silence and
said:
-Well, the loneliness of these mountains has not been part to cover me up, nor
looseness of my decomposed hair has not allowed me to be a liar
tongue, it would be in vain to pretend again now what, if you believed me,
it would be more out of courtesy than for any other reason. I budget this, I say,
Gentlemen, I thank you for the offer you have made me, which
has put an obligation to satisfy you in everything you have asked me,
since I fear that the relationship that makes you of my misfortunes will
cause, along with compassion, sorrow, because you will not find
remedy to remedy them or consolation to entertain them. But, with everything
this, because my honor is not wavering in your intentions, having
already known as a woman and seeing me as a girl, alone and in this suit, all things
together, and each by itself, that can destroy any honest
Credit, I'll have to tell you what I'd like to keep quiet if I could.
All this said without stopping the one that so beautiful woman seemed, with so loose
her tongue, her voice so soft that her discretion admired them no less than her
loveliness. And, returning to make new offers and new requests for
that she fulfilled her promise, she, without making more begging, putting on
all honesty and gathering her hair, she settled into the seat of a
stone, and, as the three of them stood around it, trying to force themselves to stop
some tears that came to his eyes, with a calm and clear voice,
began his life story in this way:
- «In this Andalusia there is a place from whom a duke takes title, which makes him
one of the so-called greats in Spain. He has two sons: the eldest,
heir to his state, and, apparently, of his good manners; and the youngest,
I do not know what he is heir to, but to the betrayals of Vellido and the
Galalon's lies. From this lord my parents are vassals, humble in
lineage, but so rich that if the goods of his nature were equal to the
of their fortune, neither they had more to wish for nor was I afraid to see myself in the
misery in which I see myself; because maybe my little luck is born from which not
they had in not having been born illustrious. Well it is true that they are not so
low that they can insult their state, nor so high that they take away
the imagination that I have that from his humility comes my misfortune. Them,
In short, they are farmers, plain people, without a mixture of some bad-sounding race,
and, as they say, stale old Christians; but so rich that their
wealth and magnificent treatment are gradually acquiring the name of
hidalgos, and even knights. Since of the greatest wealth and nobility that
they prided themselves on having me as their daughter; and, thus for not having another
nor another who inherited them as being parents, and amateurs, I was one of
the most gifted daughters fathers ever gave away. It was the mirror in which
they looked, the staff of their old age, and the subject to whom they directed,
measuring them with the sky, all your desires; of which, because they are
so good, mine did not get a point. And in the same way that I was a lady
of their spirits, so it was of their hacienda: for me they received and said goodbye
the servants; the reason and account of what was sown and caught passed through me
hand; the oil mills, the wine presses, the number of cattle
major and minor, that of the hives. Finally, of everything that a so
rich farmer as my father can have and has, I had the account, and it was
the butler and lady, with so much solicitude from me and with so much pleasure from
Well, I will not be able to make it more expensive. The moments of the day that I had left,
after having given what was convenient to the overseers, to foremen and to
other day laborers, he entertained them in exercises that are so
licit as necessary, such as those offered by the needle and pad,
and the spinning wheel many times; and if any, to recreate the mood, these
I gave up exercises, I embraced the entertainment of reading some devout book,
or to play a harp, because experience showed me that music composes
the broken spirits and alleviates the works that are born of the spirit.
"This, then, was the life that I had in my parents' house, which, if
I have counted so particularly, it was not for ostentation or for giving
understand that I am rich, but because it is noticed how without guilt I have come
of that good state that I have told the unhappy in which I am now. It is,
Well, the case that, spending my life in so many occupations and in a
confinement such that that of a monastery could be compared, without being
seen, in my opinion, of someone else than the house servants,
because the days that I went to mass were so early in the morning, and so accompanied by my
mother and other servants, and I so covered and demure that my
eyes more earth than where he put his feet; and, with all this, those of the
love, or those of idleness, to say the least, whom the lynx does not
can be equaled, they saw me, put in the request of Don Fernando, that
this is the name of the youngest son of the duke that I have told you ».
The one that the story told was not well named for Don Fernando, when at
Cardenio changed the color of his face, and began to show, with so much
great alteration that the priest and the barber, who looked into it, feared
that he was coming up with that crazy accident that they had heard said that when
in when it came. But Cardenio did not do anything other than transudate and stay
I remain, staring at the farmer, imagining who she was;
which, without noticing in Cardenio's movements, continued his
story, saying:
- «And they had not seen me well when, according to he said later, it was so
prisoner of my loves how much they gave him well to understand his demonstrations.
But, to finish quickly with the story, which does not have it, of my misfortunes,
I want to pass in silence the errands that Don Fernando did to
declare your will to me. He bribed all the people in my house, gave and offered
gifts and favors to my relatives. The days were all partying and
rejoicing in my street; the nights did not let anyone sleep the music. The
bills that, without knowing how, came into my hands, were infinite, full of
in love reasons and offers, with fewer letters than promises and
oaths. All of which not only did not soften me, but hardened me from
way as if it were my mortal enemy, and that all the works that stop
reduce myself to his will I did, I did them for the opposite effect; no
because the kindness of Don Fernando seemed wrong to me, nor that he had
too much your requests; because it gave me an I do not know how happy to see me so
beloved and esteemed of such a great gentleman, and I was not sorry to see in his
my praise papers: that in this, no matter how ugly women are, I
It seems to me that we are always glad to hear that they call us beautiful.
But all this is opposed by my honesty and the continuous advice that my
parents gave me, who already very exposed knew the will of Don
Fernando, because he was not already given anything that the whole world
knew. My parents told me that my virtue and goodness alone left and
deposited their honor and fame, and to consider the inequality that had
between me and Don Fernando, and that around here I would see that his
Though he said otherwise, his thoughts were directed to his liking rather than
to my advantage; and what if I wanted to put some way
inconvenient for him to let go of his unjust claim, that they
would later marry whoever I liked the most: thus one of the most important of
our place like all those around us, because everything could be expected
of his great estate and of my good reputation. With these certain promises,
and with the truth that they told me, I fortified my integrity, and never
I wanted to answer Don Fernando a word that I could show him, although
far away, hope to achieve your wish.
"All these modesty of mine, which he must have regarded as disdain, must have been
be the cause of further stoking his lascivious appetite, which I want to give to the
will that he showed me; which, if she were as she should, I would not
know you now, because the opportunity to tell you would have missed.
Finally, Don Fernando learned that my parents were about to give me status, to
take away the hope of possessing me, or, at least, because I had
more guards to keep me; and this new or suspicion was cause for
do what you will now hear. And it was that one night, while I was in my room
with alone the company of a maid who served me, having tightly closed
the doors, for fear that my honesty would not be seen in
danger, without knowing or imagining how, in the midst of
preventions, and in the solitude of this silence and confinement, I found
in front of me, whose sight disturbed me so that it took the sight out of my eyes and
the tongue became mute; and thus, I was not powerful to give voices, not even he believed
that he would let me give them, because then he came to me, and, taking me between his
arms (because, as I say, I did not have the strength to defend myself, as I was
troubled), began to tell me such reasons, that I do not know how it is possible that
the lie has so much skill that it knows how to compose them so that they seem
so true. The traitor made his tears prove his words
and his intention sighs. I, poor thing, alone among mine, bad
exercised in similar cases, I began, I do not know in what way, to take for
so many falsehoods true, but not in such a way that they move me to compassion
less than good her tears and sighs.
»And so, the shock passing by at first, I went back some time to collect
my lost spirits, and with more courage than I thought I could have,
I said: `` If as I am, sir, in your arms, I was among those of a lion
fierce and getting rid of them would ensure that I would do, or say, something
that it was to the detriment of my honesty, even if it were possible to do
He says how it is possible to cease to have been what he was. So if you
you have my body girded with your arms, I have my soul tied with my
good wishes, which are as different from yours as you will see if with
make me force you want to move forward in them. I am your vassal, but no
your slave; nor does the nobility of your blood have or should have an empire
dishonor and despise the humility of mine; and while I estimate myself,
villain and farmer, like you, sir and gentleman. With me they must not be
Your strength should have no effect, nor should your wealth or your
Words must be able to deceive me, nor your sighs and tears soften me.
If any of these things that I have said I saw in which my parents
they gave me for a husband, my will be adjusted to their will, and my will of the
hers did not come out; so that, as he was honored, even if he was left without
gladly, I will give you what you, sir, now with so much force
you try. All this I have said because it is not to think that
Someone who is not my last husband. '' '' If you only notice
that, beautiful Dorotea - (this is the name of this unfortunate woman), said the
disloyal gentleman-, you see: here I give you my hand to be yours, and be witnesses
this truth the heavens, to whom nothing is astonished, and this image of
Our Lady here you are. ''
When Cardenio heard him say that her name was Dorotea, he returned to his
shocks and just confirmed his first opinion as true; but no
wanted to interrupt the story, to see what ended up in what he almost
I knew; just said:
"Is Dorotea your name, ma'am?" Another I have heard say of the same, that
perhaps it runs hand in hand with your misfortunes. Come on ahead, what time will come in
tell you things that scare you in the same degree that they hurt you.
Dorotea noticed Cardenio's reasons and his strange and disgraced
I brought him, and begged him that if he knew anything about his estate, he would tell him
later; because if something had left him good fortune, it was the spirit that
had to suffer any disaster that befell her, certain that, at
In his opinion, none could get that the one who had increased a point.
"I would not lose him, ma'am," replied Cardenio, "in telling you what I think,
if it were true what I imagine; and until now the situation is not lost, not even
you don't care at all knowing it.
"Whatever it is," answered Dorotea, "what happened in my story was that,
Don Fernando taking an image that was in that room, put it by
witness to our betrothal. With most effective words and oaths
extraordinary, he gave me the word to be my husband, since, before
finished saying them, I told him to take a good look at what he was doing and consider
the anger that his father had to receive to see him married to a villain
his vassal; not to be blinded by my beauty, just as it was, because it was not
enough to find in it an excuse for his error, and that if some good
I wanted to do, for the love he had for me, was to let my luck run
equal to what my quality could, because never so uneven
marriages are not enjoyed nor do they last long in that taste with which they begin.
All these reasons that I have said here, I told you, and many others that I did not
Okay, but they weren't part of him stopping his attempt, alright
anxious as the one who does not think to pay, who, when arranging for the cheap, does not repair
in inconvenience. I, at this time, made a brief speech with me, and
I said to myself: '' Yes, I will not be the first to
has risen from humble to great state, nor will Don Fernando be the first to
who beauty, or blind fondness, which is the truest thing, has made take
unequal company to his greatness. Well, if I don't make the world or use a new one,
It is well to go to this honor that luck offers me, since in this one
will last longer that shows me how long the fulfillment of its
wish; that, in short, I will be his wife with God. And if I want with disdain
fired, in term I see that, not using the one he should, he will use the
force and I will come to be disgraced and without apology for the guilt that I could
give the one who does not know how without it I have come to this point. Because what
reasons will be enough to persuade my parents, and others, that this
knight entered my room without my consent? ''
All these demands and answers I stirred in an instant in the
imagination; and, above all, they began to force me and incline to
what was, without me thinking about it, my downfall: the oaths of Don Fernando,
the witnesses he brought, the tears he shed, and finally his
disposition and kindness, which, accompanied by so many samples of true
love, could surrender to another as free and demure heart as mine.
I called my maid to accompany the witnesses of the
heaven; Don Fernando returned to reiterate and confirm his oaths; added to
the first new saints as witnesses; cast a thousand future curses, yeah
did not fulfill what he promised me; he moistened his eyes again and increased
their sighs; I held more in his arms, of which I had never
left; and with this, and with my maid leaving the room again, I
I stopped being one and he ended up being a traitor and feigned.
»The day that happened to the night of my misfortune was coming even not so fast
as I think Don Fernando wished, because, after
what the appetite asks, the greatest pleasure that can come is to withdraw from
where they reached him. I say this because Don Fernando was in a hurry to leave
of me, and, by industry of my maid, who was the same that there had
brought, before dawn was seen in the street. And when he said goodbye to me,
although not with as much eagerness and vehemence as when he came, he told me that
was sure of her faith and that her oaths were firm and true; and,
for further confirmation of his word, he took a rich ring from his finger and put it on
in mine. In effect, he left and I didn't even know if sad or happy; this
I know well to say: that I was confused and thoughtful, and almost out of me with the
new occurrence, and I did not have the courage, or did not remember, to scold my
maiden for the betrayal committed by locking up don Fernando in myself
room, because I still had not determined whether it was good or bad that I had
happened. When I left, I told Don Fernando that on the same road to
that one could see me other nights, because it was already his, until, when he
I wanted that fact to be published. But no other came, if it was not the
Next, I couldn't see him on the street or in church for more than a month;
that in vain I got tired of requesting it, since I knew it was in the villa
and that most days he went hunting, an exercise of which he was very fond.
»These days and these hours I know well that for me they were unfortunate and
diminished, and I know well that I began to doubt them, and even to disbelieve the
faith of Don Fernando; and I also know that my maid then heard the words
that in rebuke of his audacity he had not heard before; and I know it was me
forced to have account with my tears and with the composure of my face, for
not give occasion for my parents to ask me what I was up to
dissatisfied and forced me to look for lies that you tell. But all this
It ended at one point, arriving one where respects were run over and
the honest speeches ended, and where patience was lost and they left
to square my secret thoughts. And this was because, in a few days,
It was said in the place as in a city nearby there had married Don
Fernando with a very beautiful maiden in all extremes, and very important
parents, though not so rich that, for the dowry, he could aspire to so noble
marriage. She said her name was Luscinda, with other things than in her
betrothal took place worthy of admiration. "
Cardenio heard Luscinda's name, and did nothing but shrink his
shoulders, bite your lips, raise your eyebrows and then gradually stop
for his eyes two sources of tears. But it was not for this reason that Dorotea
follow his tale, saying:
- «This sad news reached my ears, and instead of making my heart freeze
in oil, the anger and rage was so great that it ignited in him, that he
so as not to go out into the streets shouting, publishing treachery and
betrayal that had been done to me. But this fury was tempered by then with
to think about putting into action that night what I put in: what was putting myself
in this habit, given to me by one of those who call zagales in the house of the
farmers, who was my father's servant, to whom I discovered all my
misadventure, and I begged him to accompany me to the city where I understood that my
enemy was. He, after he had rebuked my daring and ugly
my determination, seeing me resolved in my opinion, offered to have me
company, as he said, to the end of the world. Then, at the moment, I locked up
on a canvas pillow a woman's dress, and some jewels and money,
for what could happen. And in the silence of that night, without realizing
my treacherous maid, I left my house, accompanied by my servant and
many imaginations, and I set out on foot from the city, carried in
flight of desire to arrive, since not to interfere with what I had for granted, to
at least to tell Don Fernando to tell me with what soul he had done it.
»I got where I wanted in two and a half days, and as I entered the city,
I asked about Luscinda's parents' house, and the first one I made
the question answered me more than I wanted to hear. He told me the house and
everything that had happened in his daughter's betrothal, a thing so public in
the city, which is made in groups to be told throughout it. Tell me that
the night Don Fernando married Luscinda, after she had
given the yes to be his wife, he had taken a severe faint, and that,
her husband arriving to unbutton her chest to give her air,
found a paper written in the same handwriting as Luscinda, on which he said and
declared that she could not be the wife of Don Fernando, because she was one of
Cardenio, who, to what the man told me, was a very leading gentleman
of the same city; And if he had said yes to Don Fernando, it was for no
get out of the obedience of your parents. In resolution, such reasons said that
contained the paper, which implied that she had intended to
kill themselves in the end of marrying, and gave there the reasons why they had
taken life. All of which they say confirmed a dagger found on him
I do not know in which part of their dresses. All of which seen by Don Fernando,
Seeming to him that Luscinda had mocked and ridiculed and belittled him,
he lunged at her, before he returned from his swoon, and with the same dagger as
They found him wanted to stab her; and he would if his parents and those who
they were present they will not hinder it. They said more: that later
Don Fernando was absent, and that Luscinda had not returned from her parasism until
another day, when she told her parents how she was the real wife of that
Cardenio I said. I learned more: that the Cardenio, as they said, was found
present at the betrothal, and that, seeing her betrothed, which he never
he thought, he left the city in despair, leaving him first a written
letter, in which he implied the injury that Luscinda had wronged him, and
how he went where people would not see him.
"This was all public and notorious throughout the city, and everyone was talking about it;
and they talked more when they learned that Luscinda had been absent from her
fathers and the city, since they did not find it in all of it, that they lost the
her parents judged and did not know what means to take to find her. This what
I knew he put my hopes on the side, and I thought it better not to have found Don
Fernando, that I did not find him married, it seemed to me that he was not yet completely
closed the door to my medicine, giving myself to understand that it could be that
Heaven would have put that impediment in the second marriage, for
attract him to know what he owed to the first, and to realize that
He was a Christian and that he was more obliged to his soul than to respect
humans. All these things stirred my fantasy, and consoled me without
take comfort, feigning long and faint hopes, to
entertain life, which I already abhor.
"Being, then, in the city, not knowing what to do to myself, because
found, reached my ears a public proclamation, where a great
I find whoever finds me, giving the signs of age and of the same suit
what was he bringing; and I heard that it was said that he had taken me out of my house
parents, the boy who came with me, something that touched my soul, to see how
my credit was down, because it was not enough to lose him with my coming, but
add the with whom, being subject so low and so unworthy of my good
thoughts. At the point that I heard the cry, I left the city with my
servant, who was already beginning to show signs of wavering in the faith that
fidelity had promised me, and that night we entered through the thick
this mountain, with the fear of not being found. But, as the saying goes
that one evil calls another, and that the end of a misfortune is usually the beginning
of another older, so it happened to me, because my good servant, until then
faithful and sure, just as he saw me in this solitude, prompted by his own
beauty before my beauty, wanted to take advantage of the occasion
that, in his opinion, these wastes offered him; and, with little shame and less
fear of God nor my respect, it required me to love; and, seeing that I with
ugly and just words responded to the shamelessness of their purposes,
put aside the pleas, of whom he first thought to take advantage of, and began to
use of force. But the just heaven, which seldom stops
look and favor the right intentions, favored mine, in a way
that with my little strength, and with little work, I found him for a
collapse, where I left him, I do not know if dead or alive; and then with more
lightness that my shock and fatigue asked, I entered these mountains,
without carrying another thought or another distinction than to hide in them and flee
of my father and of those who on his part were looking for me.
With this desire, I do not know how many months I entered them, where I found a
rancher who took me by his servant to a place that is in the bowels
this sierra, which I have served as a boy all this time, trying
always be in the field to cover up these hairs that now, so yes
think about it, I have been discovered. But all my industry and all my solicitude
was and has been of no benefit, for my master came in knowledge that
I was not a male, and the same evil thought was born in him as in my servant;
and, since fortune with work does not always give remedies, I did not find
collapse or ravine from which to fall and wake the master, as I found him
for the servant; and thus, I had the least inconvenience to leave him
again among these rough edges to test my strength or my apologies with him.
I say, then, that I returned to ambush, and to search where without impediment
someone could with sighs and tears beg heaven to hurt me
misadventure and give me industry and favor to get out of it, or to leave life
between these solitudes, without leaving a memory of this sad, that so without
her fault will have given material so that she can be talked about and murmured in the
yours and in other people's lands. "
Chapter XXIX. Which is about the discretion of the beautiful Dorotea, with other
things of great taste and hobby
-This is, gentlemen, the true story of my tragedy: look and judge
now if the sighs you heard, the words you heard and the
Tears that flowed from my eyes, had enough opportunity to show themselves in
greater abundance; and, considering the quality of my misfortune, you will see that
the consolation will be in vain, since the remedy for it is impossible. I only beg you
(what you can and should do with ease) that you advise me where I can
spend my life without ending the fear and shock that I have to be
found by those who seek me; that, although I know that the much love that my
parents have me assure me that I will be well received by them, there is so much
I am ashamed only to think that, not as they thought, I have to
seem to his presence, that it is better for me to banish myself forever from being
view than not seeing their faces, with the thought that they are looking at someone else's
of the honesty that they should have promised me.
He was silent in saying this, and his face was covered with a color that showed
very clear the feeling and shame of the soul. In theirs they felt the
who listened to her had both pity and admiration for her misfortune; and,
Although later the priest wanted to console and advise her, he first took the
Cardenio hand, saying:
-Well, lady, you are the beautiful Dorotea, the only daughter of the rich man
Clenardo.
Dorotea was astonished when she heard her father's name, and to see how
little was the one who named him, because it has already been said in a bad way that
Cardenio was dressed; and thus, he said:
"And who are you, brother, so you know my father's name?" Because
I, until now, if I remember correctly, in the whole speech of my story
unfortunately I have not named him.
`` I am, '' replied Cardenio, `` the one without luck who, according to you, madam,
Said, Luscinda said it was his wife. I am the unfortunate Cardenio, whom
the bad term of the one who has put you in the one you are in has
brought to you to see me which you see me: broken, naked, lacking in all human
consolation and, worst of all, lacking in judgment, for I have nothing but
when heaven wants to give it to me for a brief space. I, Teodora,
I am the one who found myself present to the unreason of Don Fernando, and the one who
he waited to hear the yes that Luscinda uttered to be his wife. I am the one who does not
he had the courage to see where his fainting stopped, or what came of the paper
that was found in his chest, because his soul did not suffer to see
so many misadventures together; and so I left the house and patience, and a letter
that I left a guest of mine, whom I begged to give to Luscinda
put, and come to these solitudes, with the intention of ending the
life, which from that point on I hated as my mortal enemy. But has not
dear luck to take it away from me, contenting myself with taking my mind off, perhaps
for keeping me for the good fortune that I have had in finding you; well, being
true, as I think it is, what you have told here, it could still be that
to both of us heaven had kept a better event in our
disasters that we think. Because, budget that Luscinda can't
marry Don Fernando, for being mine, nor Don Fernando with her, for being
yours, and having so manifestly declared it, we may well hope
May heaven restore to us what is ours, since it is still in being, and
it has not been alienated or undone. And, well, this consolation we have, born not of
very remote hope, nor founded on wild imaginations, beg you,
Madam, take another resolution in your honest thoughts, for
I am thinking of taking it into my own, accommodating you to hope for a better fortune; that
I swear to you, by the faith of a gentleman and a Christian, not to abandon
see you in the power of Don Fernando, and that, when with reasons he could not
to attract him to know what he owes you, to then use the freedom that
grants being a knight, and power with a just title challenge him, by reason of
the unreason that he does to you, without remembering my grievances, whose revenge
I will leave heaven to go on earth to yours.
With what Cardenio said, Dorotea finished admiring, and, for not knowing what
thanks to return to such great offers, he wanted to take her feet to
kiss them; but Cardenio did not consent to it, and the lawyer responded by
between them, and approved of Cardenio's good speech, and, above all, he begged them,
advised and persuaded them to go with him to his village, where they could
repair the things that were missing, and that there would be order how
look for Don Fernando, or how to take Dorotea to her parents, or do whatever
the more they see fit. Cardenio and Dorotea thanked him, and
They accepted the mercy that was offered to them. The barber, who had been to everything
suspenseful and quiet, he also made his good talk and offered with no less
will that he heals everything that is good to serve them.
He also briefly recounted the cause that had brought them there, with the
strangeness of Don Quixote's madness, and how they awaited his squire, who
he had gone to buscalle. Cardenio is remembered, as if by dreams, the
quarrel that he had had with Don Quixote and told the others about it, but not
He knew how to say why his cystion was caused.
In this, they heard voices, and they knew that the one who gave them was Sancho Panza,
who, not having found them in the place where he left them, called them to
voices. They came out to meet him, and, asking him about Don Quixote, he told them
how she had found him naked in his shirt, skinny, yellow, and dead
hunger, and sighing for his lady Dulcinea; and that, since he had
said that she commanded him to leave that place and go to the
Toboso, where he was waiting, had replied that he was determined
of not appearing before his handsome beauty that he had done feats that
they were worthy of his grace. And if that happened, he would run
danger of not becoming emperor, as he was obliged, not even
Archbishop, which was the least it could be. So that they look at what I know
had to do to get him out of there.
The lawyer replied that he was not sorry, that they would get him out of
there, bad that it weighed him. Then he told Cardenio and Dorotea what they had
thought for Don Quixote's remedy, at least to take him home. TO
which Dorothea said that she would make the needy maiden better than the
barber, and more, that he had there dresses with which to do it to the natural, and that
left her in charge of knowing how to represent everything that was necessary
to carry out her attempt, because she had read many books of
chivalry and knew well the style of careful maidens when
they asked their gifts from the and formerly knights.
"Well, it is no longer necessary," said the priest, "but rather that it be put into action later;
that, without a doubt, good luck is shown in our favor, then, so without
think about it, for you, gentlemen, the door has begun to open to
your remedy and we have been given what we needed.
Dorotea then took from her pillow a full skirt of a certain rich and
a tablecloth made of another showy green cloth, and from a small box a necklace and
other jewels, with which in an instant it was adorned in such a way that a rich and great
lady seemed. All that, and more, he said he had taken out of his house to
whatever was offered, and that until then he had not been offered an opportunity
I need to talk about it. They were all delighted by his great grace, grace and
beauty, and confirmed Don Fernando for little knowledge, because
so much beauty discarded.
But the one who was most admired was Sancho Panza, for it seemed to him -as it was so
true- that in all the days of his life he had seen such a beautiful creature;
and thus, he asked the priest with great eagerness to tell him who was that so
beautiful lady, and what was she looking for in those andurriales.
`` This beautiful lady, '' replied the priest, `` Sancho brother, is, like someone who doesn't
says nothing, is the heiress by straight line of male of the great kingdom of
Micomicón, which comes in search of your master to ask for a gift, which
it is that a one-eyed man takes on him, or that a bad giant has an affront to him; and,
to the fame that your master has as a good knight for all that has been discovered,
From Guinea this princess has come to look for you.
`` Happy sought and happy find, '' said Sancho Panza at this time, `` and more
If my master is so fortunate that he takes that offense and straightens that one-eyed man,
killing that hide whore is the giant that your grace says; that it will kill
If he finds him, if he were no longer a ghost, that against ghosts he would not
my lord has any power. But one thing I want to beg of your
mercy, among others, Mr. Graduate, and it is that, because my master does not take
want to be archbishop, which is what I fear, that your grace will
advise you to marry this princess later, and thus you will be disabled
to receive archbishop orders and he will come with ease to his empire and I to
end of my wishes; that I have taken a good look at it and find on my own that
It is not right for me that my master is an archbishop, because I am useless for the
Church, because I am married, and now go to bring dispensations to be able to
having income from the Church, having, as I have, a wife and children, would be
never ending. So sir, all the touch is on my master marrying
then with this lady, who until now I do not know her grace, and thus, I do not call her
by his name.
"Call her," replied the priest, "Princess Micomicona, because, calling herself her
Micomicón kingdom, of course she has to be called that.
`` There is no doubt about that, '' answered Sancho, `` that I have seen many take the
surname and ancestry of the place where they were born, calling themselves Pedro de Alcalá,
Juan de Úbeda and Diego de Valladolid; and this should be used there in
Guinea: take the queens the names of their kingdoms.
"It must be so," said the priest; and in the matter of marrying your master, I will do
in it all my might.
With which Sancho was so happy how much the admired priest of his
simplicity, and to see how embedded in the fantasy the same
nonsense that his master, for without any doubt it was implied that he had to
become emperor.
Already, in this, Dorotea had placed herself on the priest's mule and the barber
had adjusted the beard of the ox's tail to his face, and they told Sancho
to guide them to where Don Quixote was; which they warned not to say
that he knew the bachelor or the barber, because not knowing them consisted
all the touch of becoming his master emperor; since neither the priest nor
Cardenio wanted to go with them, because Don Quixote did not remember the
he had had a quarrel with Cardenio, and the priest because there was no need
by then his presence. And so, they let them go ahead, and they
They continued on foot, little by little. The priest did not stop advising what had
to make Dorotea; to which she said to neglect, that everything would be done,
without missing a point, as requested and painted in the chivalric books.
They would have walked three-quarters of a league when they discovered Don Quixote
among some intricate rocks, already dressed, although not armed; and, as well as
Dorotea saw him and was informed by Sancho that this was Don Quixote.
whip your palfrey, followed by the well-bearded barber. And, in arriving
next to him, the squire threw himself from the mule and went to take the
Dorothea, who, getting off with great ease, went to kneel on
knees before those of Don Quixote; and, although he struggled to lift her,
Without getting up, she told him in this guise:
`` I will not get up from here, oh brave and brave knight!
your kindness and courtesy grant me a gift, which will redound in honor and
prez of your person, and in favor of the most disconsolate and aggrieved
maiden that the sun has seen. And if the courage of your strong arm
corresponds to the voice of your immortal fame, you are obliged to favor
to the unfortunate that comes from such lueñes lands, to the smell of your famous
name, seeking you to remedy their misfortunes.
"I will not answer you a word, beautiful lady," replied Don Quixote, "nor will I hear
more thing of your farm, until you get up from the ground.
`` I will not get up, sir, '' replied the grieving maiden, `` if first, by
Your courtesy, the gift I ask for is not given to me.
`` I grant him and I grant him, '' replied Don Quixote, `` as there is no
fulfill in damage or diminution of my king, of my country and of that of my
heart and freedom holds the key.
`` It will not be in damage or diminution of what you say, my good lord, '' replied the
painful maiden.
And, being in this, Sancho Panza reached the ear of his lord and very little step
Told him:
Well may your grace, sir, grant him the gift he asks for, which is not
a thing of nothing: it is only killing a giant, and this one that asks for it is the high
Princess Micomicona, queen of the great Micomicon kingdom of Ethiopia.
`` Whoever it is, '' replied Don Quixote, `` I will do what I am obliged to do and
what my conscience dictates to me, according to what I profess to have.
And, turning to the maiden, he said:
-Your great beauty gets up, I give you the gift you ask me
want.
`` Well, what I ask is, '' said the maiden, `` that your magnanimous person
Come later with me where I will take you, and promise me that you will not
get involved in another adventure or demand any until I get revenge on a
traitor who, against all divine and human rights, has usurped my
kingdom.
`` I say that I grant it so, '' answered Don Quixote, `` and so you can, lady,
from today more, discard the malenconía that tires you and make it charge
new vigor and strength your faint hope; that, with the help of
God and that of my arm, you will soon be restored in your kingdom and
sitting in the chair of your old and great state, despite already
Despite the trouble that they would like to contradict it. And hands to work, what
in the delay they say that there is usually danger.
The needy maid struggled, with great persistence, to kiss his hands, but
Don Quixote, who in everything was a restrained and courteous gentleman, never
consented; before, he made her get up and hugged her with great courtesy and
restraint, and ordered Sancho to request the girths from Rocinante and
then arm yourself to the point. Sancho took down his weapons, which, as a trophy, from a
tree were hanging, and, requiring the girths, at one point he armed his
Mister; who, seeing himself armed, said:
-Let's go from here, in the name of God, to favor this great lady.
The barber was still on his knees, taking great care to hide his
laughter and that his beard did not fall, with the fall of which perhaps all
without getting your good intention; and, seeing that the gift was already granted
and with the diligence that Don Quixote was getting ready to go to meet him, he
He lifted up and took his mistress by the other hand, and between the two they carried her up in
the mule. Then Don Quixote climbed over Rocinante, and the barber made himself comfortable
on his horse, Sancho staying on foot, where again his
loss of the rook, with the lack that it then did; but all he wore
with pleasure, because it seemed to him that his master was already on the way, and very
pique, to be emperor; because without a doubt he thought that
marry that princess, and be, at least, king of Micomicon. Just him
It was sad to think that that kingdom was in the land of blacks, and that the
people who were given to him by his vassals had to be all black; to the Which
Then he made a good remedy in his imagination, and said to himself:
-What does it give me that my vassals are black? Will there be more to carry
them and bring them to Spain, where I can sell them, and where they will pay me
cash, from which money I will be able to buy some title or some trade with
to live rested every day of my life? No, but go to sleep, and no
have wit or ability to dispose of things and to sell
thirty or ten thousand vassals in give me those straws! By God I have them
fly, boy with big, or as I can, and that, no matter how black they are, I have
to turn white or yellow. Come on, I'm sucking my finger!
With this, he was so solicitous and happy that he forgot the
regret of walking on foot.
All this Cardenio and the priest were looking at from among some bushes, and did not know what
made to join them; but the priest, who was a great tracist,
Then he imagined what they would do to get what they wanted; and it was that with
A pair of scissors in a case quickly removed the beard from
Cardenio, and dressed him in a brown cape that he brought and gave him a blue tit
black, and he stayed in hose and doublet; and it was so different from what before
Cardenio seemed, that he himself did not know himself, although he
look. Done this, since the others had passed ahead while
that they disguised themselves, they easily went out onto the royal road before
them, because the weeds and bad steps of those places did not grant
let both those on horseback and those on foot walk. In effect, they
they put on the plain, at the exit of the sierra, and, just as it came out of the don
Quixote and his comrades, the priest began to look very wide, giving
signs that she was recognizing him; and, after having a good piece
been looking, she went to him with open arms and shouting:
-For the good may the mirror of the cavalry be found, my good compatriot
Don Quixote de la Mancha, the flower and cream of kindness, the protection and
remedy for the needy, the quintessence of knights errant.
And, saying this, he had embraced by the knee of the left leg to
Don Quixote; which, terrified of what he saw and heard say and do that
man, he began to look at him carefully, and, at last, he met him and was like
terrified to see him, and made great force to get off; but the priest does not
He consented, for which Don Quixote said:
-Leave me your mercy, Mr. Graduate, that is not a reason that I am to
horse, and such a revered person as your grace is on foot.
"I will not consent to that in any way," said the priest.
greatness on horseback, because being on horseback finishes the greatest feats and
adventures that have been seen in our age; that to me, although unworthy
priest, it will be enough for me to climb on the haunches of one of these mules of these gentlemen
who walk with your grace, if they have not done it out of anger. And I will still count
that I am a knight on the horse Pegasus, or on the zebra or alfana in which
rode that famous Moor Muzaraque, who even now lies enchanted
on the great Zulema slope, which is not far from the great Compluto.
"I had not yet fallen for the time, my lord licentiate," replied Don Quixote; and me
I know that my lady the princess will be served, by my love, to send her
squire give your mercy the saddle of his mule, that he will be able to accommodate
on the haunches, if she suffers them.
"Yes, he suffers, to which I believe," replied the princess; and I also know not
it will be necessary to send it to my lord my squire, who is so courteous and so
courtier who will not allow an ecclesiastical person to go on foot,
being able to go on horseback.
"That's right," replied the barber.
And, getting off at one point, he invited the priest with the chair, and he took it without
get a lot of begging. And it was the evil that when the barber climbed on the haunches,
the mule, which, in effect, was for rent, that to say that this was bad
enough, he raised his hindquarters a little and kicked twice in the air, which,
give them to Master Nicolás's chest, or to his head, he would give the devil the
coming for don Quixote. With all that, they startled him so that he fell
on the ground, with so little care for his beards, that they fell off in the
ground; and, as he saw himself without them, he had no choice but to go to
cover his face with both hands and complain that his
grinders. Don Quixote, as all that beard pack saw, without jaws and without
blood, away from the face of the fallen squire, said:
"Long live God, this is a great miracle!" The beard has knocked him down and
torn from the face, as if they were removed on purpose!
The priest, who saw the danger of his invention of being discovered,
Then he went to the beards and went with them to where Master Nicolás lay,
still crying out, and with a blow, his head coming to his chest, he
he put them, murmuring a few words over him, which he said was true
appropriate spell to glue beards, as you would see; and, when he had them
put on, he moved away, and the squire was left as well bearded and as healthy as
earlier, that Don Quixote was greatly admired, and begged the priest that when
if it took place, teach him that incantation; that he understood that his virtue to
more than sticking beards should be stretched, because it was clear that from where
the beards were removed, the flesh would remain sore and battered, and that,
Well, he healed everything, he took advantage of more than beards.
"Yes," said the priest, and promised to teach him the first time.
They arranged for the priest to come up at that time, and for some lengths the
three moving, until they reached the sale, which would be up to two leagues
thence. With the three of them on horseback, it is to wit, Don Quixote, the princess and
the priest, and the three on foot, Cardenio, the barber and Sancho Panza, Don Quixote
said to the maiden:
"Your greatness, my lady, guide where you like best."
And, before she answered, the lawyer said:
-To what kingdom does your lordship want to guide? Is it, by any chance, towards
that of Micomicón ?; that it must be, or I know little about kingdoms.
She, who was fine in everything, understood that she had to answer yes; and
thus, he said:
-Yes, sir, towards that kingdom is my path.
`` If so, '' said the priest, `` we must pass through half of my town, and
there the defeat of Cartagena will take your mercy, where it will be possible to embark
with good fortune; and if there is a prosperous wind, a calm sea and without
storm, in a little less than nine years it will be possible to be in sight of the great
Meona lagoon, I say, Meotides, which is just over a hundred more days here
of the kingdom of your greatness.
`` Your grace is deceived, my lord, '' she said, `` because not two years have
that I left him, and in truth I never had a good time, and, with all that,
I have come to see what I wanted so much, which is Mr. Don Quixote de la
Mancha, whose news reached my ears as I set foot in Spain,
and they moved me to look for him, to entrust me with his courtesy and trust my
justice of the value of his invincible arm.
"No more: cease my praise," said Don Quixote at this time, "because I am
enemy of all kinds of flattery; and, although this is not, still
such talks offend my chaste ears. What I know how to say, lady
mine, whether it has value or not, the one that has or does not have to be used
in your service until you lose your life; and so, leaving this for your
time, I beg the lawyer to tell me what is the cause that has brought him
in these parts, so alone, and so without servants, and so lightly, that I
it is scary.
`` To that I will answer briefly, '' replied the priest, `` because your
Thank you, Senor Don Quixote, that I and Master Nicolás, our friend and our
barber, we were going to Seville to collect some money that a relative of mine who has
many years that he spent in the Indies he had sent me, and not so few that do not pass
of sixty thousand pesos rehearsed, which is something else; and, going through yesterday
these places, four robbers came out to meet us and took
even the beards; and so they took them away from us, which suited the barber
put them on false; and even this young man who goes here - pointing to
Cardenio- they put him like new. And it is the good thing that is public fame for
all these outlines that those who skipped us are of some galley slaves who
They say that he freed, almost in this very place, a man so brave that,
Despite the commissioner and the guards, he released them all; and, without a doubt
Someone, he must be out of his mind, or he must be such a great scoundrel
like them, or some man without a soul and without a conscience, because he wanted to
the wolf among the sheep, the fox among the chickens, the fly among the
honey; wanted to defraud justice, go against his king and natural lord, because
it was against his righteous commandments. He wanted, I mean, to remove to the galleys their
feet, to put in an uproar the Holy Brotherhood, who had many years that
rested; wanted, finally, to do a deed where his soul is lost and
do not win your body.
Sancho had told the priest and the barber the adventure of the galley slaves,
that his master finished with so much glory of his, and for this the priest carried his hand
referring to her, to see what Don Quixote did or said; to which
changed the color with each word, and he dared not say that he had been the
liberator of those good people.
"These, then," said the priest, "were the ones who robbed us; that God, for his
Mercy, forgive him who did not allow them to suffer due punishment.
Chapter XXX. Which is about the funny artifice and order that was taken in removing
to our loving knight of the most harsh penance in which he had
Market Stall
The priest had not finished well, when Sancho said:
-Well, my faith, Mr. Graduate, the one who did that feat was my master, and not
because I did not tell him before and I told him to look at what he was doing, and that it was
It is a sin to give them freedom, because they all went there as great scoundrels.
-Pestle! Don Quixote said at this time,
It is not their business to find out whether the afflicted, chained, and oppressed
they find on the roads they go that way, or they are in that way
anguish, for their faults or for their graces; you only have to help them like
needy, putting their eyes on their sorrows and not on their mischief. Me
I came across a rosary and a string of pouting and unhappy people, and I did what
that my religion asks me, and the rest there is agreed; and who has badly
similar, except for the holy dignity of the graduate and his honorable
person, I say that he knows little of chivalric ailment, and that he lies like a
a whore and a bastard; and this I will make you know with my sword, where else
long is contained.
And this he said, asserting himself in the stirrups and putting on his nose; because the
The barber's basin, which at his expense was Mambrino's helmet, was hanging
of the front pommel, until it is marinated from the bad treatment that the
galley slaves.
Dorotea, who was discreet and of great grace, as one who already knew the
Don Quixote's diminished humor and that everyone made fun of him, except Sancho
Belly, he did not want to be for less, and, seeing him so angry, said:
-Mr. Knight, honor your grace for the gift that you have for me.
promised, and who, according to him, can not interfere in another adventure,
however urgent it is; your mercy calm the chest, that if the lord
the lawyer knew that by that undefeated arm the
galley slaves, he would give himself three stitches on the mouth, and even bite himself three times
the tongue, rather than having said a word that in spite of your mercy
will redound.
"I swear that well," said the priest, "and I would have even removed a mustache."
`` I will be silent, my lady, '' said Don Quixote, `` and I will repress the just anger that
I had already risen in my chest, and I will go quiet and peaceful until
I fulfill the promised gift to you; but, in return for this good wish, I beg you
say, if it does not hurt you, what is your concern and how many,
who and what are the people of whom I have to give you due,
satisfied and full revenge.
`` I will do that, '' answered Dorotea, `` if you do not annoy
pity and misfortune.
"You will not get angry, my lady," replied Don Quixote.
To which Dorotea replied:
-Well, that's the way it is, your mercies be attentive to me.
She had not said this, when Cardenio and the barber approached
side, eager to see how the discreet Dorotea pretended her story; and the
Sancho did the same, who was so deceived with her as his master. And her,
after you have gotten well in the chair and prevented yourself from coughing and doing
Other gestures, with much grace, began to say in this way:
- «First of all, I want your mercies to know, my lords, that I
they call me ... »
And he stopped here for a bit, because he forgot the name that the priest had given him.
Market Stall; but he went to the remedy, because he understood what he was seeing, and
said:
-It is no wonder, my lady, that your greatness is troubled and
recounting their misadventures, that they are usually such, that many times
take away the memory of those who mistreat, in such a way that even of their own
names are not remembered, as they have done with your great lordship, which
has forgotten that her name is Princess Micomicona, the legitimate heir of the great
Micomicon kingdom; and with this aim can your greatness reduce
now easily to his hurt memory everything he wants to tell.
"That is the truth," replied the maiden, "and from here on I believe that
It will not be necessary to sign up for anything, that I will come to fruition with my
true story. «Which is that the king my father, who is called Tinacrio
the Elder, was very learned in what they call the magic art, and reached for
his science that my mother, who was called Queen Jaramilla, was to die
first than him, and that in a short time he too would have to pass this
life and I was to be orphaned of father and mother. But he said no
this tired him so much that it confused him to know, for a very
true, that a huge giant, lord of a great island, who almost
adjoins our kingdom, called Pandafilando de la Fosca Vista (because it is
thing found out that, although he has his eyes in their place and rights, he always
he looks upside down, as if he were cross-eyed, and this makes him evil and
put fear and terror to those who look); I say that he knew that this giant, in
Knowing my orphanhood, I had to pass with great power over my kingdom and I
I had to take it all away, without leaving me a small village to pick me up;
but what could I excuse all this ruin and misfortune if I wanted to get married
with the; but, as far as he understood, he never thought it would come to me in
will to make such an unequal marriage; and told the truth in this,
because it has never crossed my mind to marry that giant,
but not with any other, no matter how big and outrageous he might be. Also said my
father that, after he was dead and I saw that Panda filing
it began to pass over my kingdom, that it did not wait to put me in defense,
because it would be to destroy me, but to freely leave him
kingdom, if I wanted to excuse the death and total destruction of my good and
loyal vassals, because it would not be possible to defend myself against the devilish
giant's strength; but later, with some of my own, I put myself in
road to Spain, where I would find the remedy for my ills by finding a
knight errant, whose fame in this time would spread throughout this
kingdom, which was to be called, if I remember correctly, Don Azote or Don
Gigote.
`` Don Quixote would say, ma'am, '' Sancho Panza said at this time, `` or, on the other hand,
name, the Knight of the Sad Figure.
"That is the truth," said Dorotea. «He said more: that it had to be high of
body, dry face, and that on the right side, below the shoulder
left, or near it, there must have been a brown mole with certain
hair like bristles. »
Hearing this, Don Quixote said to his squire:
-Here, Sancho, son, help me to undress, I want to see if I am the
knight that that wise king left prophesied.
"Well, why does your grace want to undress?" said Dorotea.
"To see if I have that mole that your father said," answered Don Quixote.
"There is no need to undress," said Sancho, "I know you have your
thanks to a mole in the middle of the spine, which is a sign of being
strong man.
"That's enough," said Dorotea, "because with friends you don't have to look at
things, and whether it is on the shoulder or on the spine, matters little;
It is enough that there is a mole, and wherever it may be, because everything is the same flesh;
and, without a doubt, my good father was right in everything, and I have been right in entrusting myself
to Mr. Don Quixote, that he is the one my father said about, because the signs
of the face come with those of the good reputation that this gentleman has not only
in Spain, but throughout La Mancha, since I had hardly landed in
Osuna, when I heard so many exploits of his that later gave me the soul that
It was the same that I came to look for.
"Well, how did your grace disembark in Osuna, my lady?"
Don Quixote-, if it is not a sea port?
But, before Dorotea answered, the priest took her hand and said:
-The lady princess must mean that, after she disembarked in
Málaga, the first part where he heard news of your grace was in Osuna.
"That's what I meant," said Dorotea.
"And this is on the way," said the priest, "and your Majesty go on."
`` We must not continue, '' answered Dorotea, `` but, finally, my luck
has been so good at finding Mr. Don Quixote, that I already tell myself and I have
as queen and mistress of all my kingdom, for he, for his courtesy and
magnificence, he has promised me the gift of going with me wherever I
I will take, that it will not be anywhere else than to put him in front of Pandafilando de
the Fosca Vista, so that I kill him and restore me what so against reason
has usurped: that all this has to happen by the name of the word, because that's how it
Tinacrios the Wisdom, my good father, left prophesied; which also left
said and written in Chaldean or Greek letters, that I cannot read, that if
this knight of prophecy, having slaughtered the giant,
wanted to marry me, that I later granted myself without any reply for
his rightful wife, and give him possession of my kingdom, along with my
person.
-What do you think, Sancho friend? Don Quixote said at this point. Don't you hear
what's up? Didn't I tell you? See if we already have a kingdom to rule and reign
with whom to marry.
"That's what I swear," said Sancho, "for the fucking who won't marry by opening the
Gaznatico to Mr. Pandahilado! Well, look, the queen is bad! Thus
the fleas in the bed turn me!
And, saying this, he gave two shoes in the air, with samples of very great
happy, and then he went to take the reins of Dorotea's mule, and,
making her stop, he knelt before her, begging her to give him
his hands to kiss, as a sign that he received her for his queen and mistress.
Who would not laugh at the surrounding, seeing the madness of the master and the
simplicity of the servant? Indeed, Dorotea gave them to him, and promised to
make him great lord in his kingdom, when heaven would do him so much good that
let him charge and enjoy. Sancho thanked him with such words that
renewed laughter in all.
`` This, gentlemen, '' Dorotea continued, `` is my story.
that of how many accompanying people I took out of my kingdom, I have not been
but only this good bearded squire, because they all drowned in a great
storm we had in sight of the port, and he and I went out on two boards to
land, as if by miracle; and thus, the speech of
my life, as you may have noticed. And if in something I have walked too much, or
not as successful as it should be, blame what the graduate
said at the beginning of my story: that continuous and
extraordinary take away the memory of the sufferer.
"They won't take that from me, oh tall and brave lady!" said Don Quixote,
How many will I spend in serving you, no matter how great and unseen they may be; and so on
Again I confirm the gift that I have promised you, and I swear to go with you at the end of the
world, until I meet with your fierce enemy, whom I think, with the
help of God and of my arm, chop the proud head with the blades
desta ... I do not mean a good sword, thanks to Ginés de Pasamonte, who
brought mine.
This he muttered, and went on to say:
-And after having chopped it open and placed in the peaceful possession of your
state, it will be up to your will to make of yourself what most
mood comes to you; because, as long as my memory is occupied and
the will captivates, lost the understanding, to that one ..., and I say no more,
it is not possible that I face, not even think, marrying, even with
the Phoenix.
It seemed so bad to Sancho what his master said lately about not
wanting to marry, who, with great anger, raising his voice, said:
-I vote for me, and I swear to me, that your mercy does not have, Mr. Don Quixote,
full judgment. Well, how is it possible that your mercy doubts the
marry such a tall princess like this one? Do you think you have to offer the
fortune, after each cantillo, such a fortune as the one now
offers? Is my lady Dulcinea happier? No, by the way, nor
even with half, and I'm still going to say that it does not reach his shoe from which
it's in front. Thus, noramala, I will reach the county I hope, if your
Merced goes to ask for popcorn in the gulf. Get married, get married later,
commending Satan to him, and take that kingdom that is coming into the hands of
vobis, vobis, and, in being king, make me marquis or advance, and then,
the devil even take it all.
Don Quixote, who heard such blasphemies spoken against his lady Dulcinea, did not
could suffer it, and, raising the sandeel, without speaking a word to Sancho and without
to tell him this mouth is mine, he gave him such two sticks that he hit him on the ground;
And if it weren't for Dorotea shouting at her not to give her any more, she would undoubtedly
take life there.
`` Do you think, '' he said after a while, `` you mean villain, that there must be
always to put my hand on the fork, and that everything has to be to err
you and I forgive you? Well, do not think about it, unrepentant scoundrel, that without a doubt
You are, because you have put your tongue in the unparalleled Dulcinea. And don't you know
Gañán, faquín, belitre, that if it were not for the value that she instills in me
arm, what would I not have to kill a flea? Say, you sly tongue
viperina, and who do you think has won this kingdom and cut off the head of
this giant, and make yourselves marquis, that all this I already take for granted and
thing happened in res judicata, if it is not the value of Dulcinea, taking my
arm for the instrument of his exploits? She fights in me, and wins in me, and I
I live and breathe in it, and I have life and being. Oh you bastard scoundrel, and how
you are ungrateful: that you see yourselves raised from the dust of the earth to be
lord of title, and you correspond to such a good deed by saying badly about who you
did it!
Sancho was not so battered that he did not hear everything his master told him, and,
getting up with a bit of alacrity, he went to stand behind the palfrey of
Dorotea, and from there she said to her master:
Tell me, sir: if your grace is determined not to marry this
great princess, of course it will not be his kingdom; and, not being so, what
Mercedes can you do me? This is what I complain about; marry your
Thank you one by one with this queen, now that we have her here like rain
from heaven, and then he can return to my lady Dulcinea; what kings should
of having been in the world who have been breastfeed. About the
beauty I do not interfere; that, in truth, if he is going to say it, that you both
They seem fine to me, since I have never seen Mrs. Dulcinea.
"What do you mean you haven't seen her, you blasphemous traitor?" said Don Quixote. Well no
Did you just bring me a message from him now?
"I say that I have not seen it so slowly," said Sancho, "that I may have noticed
particularly its beauty and its good parts point by point; But so,
a bulk, I think it's fine.
"Now I excuse you," said Don Quixote, "and forgive me for the anger I have given you,
that the first movements are not in the hands of men.
"I can see it," answered Sancho; and thus, in me the desire to speak is always
first move, and I can't help saying, for once, what
it comes to my tongue.
`` With all that, '' said Don Quixote, `` look, Sancho, what you are talking about, because
so many times the cantarillo goes to the source ... and I won't tell you more.
"Now," answered Sancho, "God is in heaven, who sees the traps,
and he will be the judge of who does more harm: me in not speaking well, or your mercy
in obrallo.
"There is no more," said Dorotea, "run, Sancho, and kiss your hand."
sir, and apologize, and from now on go more attack on your
praise and vituperation, and say no ill of that lady Tobosa, whom I
I do not know if it is not for servilla, and have confidence in God, who has not
missing a state where you live like a prince.
Sancho was crestfallen and asked his master's hand, and he gave it to him with
rested continent; and, after he had kissed her, he gave her the
blessing, and told Sancho to go ahead a bit, that he had to
ask him and to share with him things of great importance. Did it like this
Sancho, and the two of them moved a little forward, and Don Quixote said to him:
-After you came, I have not had room or space to ask you many
things of particularity about the embassy you took and the
answer that you took; and now, because fortune has given us time and
place, do not deny me the luck that you can give me with such good news.
`` Ask your grace what you want, '' answered Sancho, `` that all
I will give as good a start as I had a start. But I beg at your mercy,
my lord, let him not be so vindictive from now on.
-Why do you say it, Sancho? Don Quixote said.
`` Say it, '' he answered, `` because these sticks of agora were more due to the quarrel
that between the two of them the devil locked the other night, that because of what I said against
my lady Dulcinea, whom I love and revere as a relic, though in
she does not, just because it is at your mercy.
"Do not return to those talks, Sancho, for your life," said Don Quixote,
they give grief; I already forgave you then, and you know well what is usually said:
a new sin, a new penance.
While the two of them were going on these talks, the priest told Dorotea that
had been very discreet, both in the story and in the brevity of it, and in
the similarity it had with those of the chivalric books. She said that
many times she had entertained in reading them, but she did not know where
were the provinces or seaports, and that so he had carefully said that
had landed in Osuna.
"I understood it that way," said the priest, "and that is why I then went to say what
I said, with which everything was accommodated. But isn't it strange to see how much
this hapless gentleman easily believes all these inventions and
lies, just because they carry the style and manner of the follies of their
books?
`` Yes it is, '' said Cardenio, `` and so rare and never seen, that I don't know if wanting to
invent and fabricate it falsely, there would have been such a sharp wit that
could hit it.
`` Well, there is something else in it, '' said the priest, `` that outside of the simplicities
that this good gentleman says regarding his madness, if they treat him of other
things, he runs with beautiful reasons and shows to have an understanding
clear and peaceful throughout. So, as long as they don't touch him on his
chivalry, there will be no one to judge you except for your very good
understanding.
While they were engaged in this conversation, Don Quixote continued with the
hers and said to Sancho:
-Let's throw, my friend belly, little hairs to the sea in this of our quarrels, and
Tell me now, regardless of any anger or resentment: Where, how and
when did you find Dulcinea? What did he do? What did you say to him? What did he answer you?
What face did he make when he read my letter? Who transferred it to you? And all
what you see that in this case is worth knowing, wondering and
be satisfied, without adding or lying to please me, let alone shorten yourself
for not taking it off.
`` Sir, '' answered Sancho, `` if you are going to tell the truth, the letter will not be
Nobody moved, because I did not bring any letter.
That is how you say, said Don Quixote, because the memory book
where I wrote it, I found it in my possession two days after your departure,
which caused me great sorrow, for not knowing what you had to do
when you saw yourself without a letter, and I always believed that you would come back from the place
where you will miss her.
`` So be it, '' answered Sancho, `` if I hadn't remembered it.
when your grace read it to me, so I told it to a sacristan,
that transferred her to my understanding, so point by point, that she said that in
every day of his life, even though he had read a lot of outrageous letters,
I had never seen or read such a beautiful letter as that one.
-And who is still in your memory, Sancho? Don Quixote said.
`` No, sir, '' answered Sancho, `` because after I gave it, as I saw that
It had to be of more benefit, forget it. And if something reminds me, it is
that of the sobajada, I mean, of the sovereign lady, and the last thing: yours until
death, the Knight of the Sad Figure. And, in between these two things,
I put more than three hundred souls, and lives, and my eyes.
Chapter XXXI. Of the tasty reasonings that passed between Don Quixote
and Sancho Panza, his squire, with other events
-All that does not displease me; go on, 'said Don Quixote.
You arrived, and what was that queen of beauty doing? Surely the
you found stringing pearls, or embroidering some company with gimp gold
for this his captive knight.
`` I did not find it, '' answered Sancho, `` but I found two hanegas of wheat in a
corral of his house.
`` Well, make sure, '' said Don Quixote, `` that the grains of that wheat were
pearl beads, headdresses of his hands. And if you looked, my friend, the wheat was
candeal, or trechel?
"It was only blond," answered Sancho.
`` Well, I assure you, '' said Don Quixote, `` that, made by his hands, he made
Candeal bread, without a doubt. But move on: when you gave him my letter,
Did you kiss her? Put it on your head? Did you perform a ceremony worthy of such
letter, or what did he do?
`` When I was going to give it to her, '' answered Sancho, `` she was on the run from the
I shook a good part of the wheat that I had in the sieve, and said to me: `` Put,
friend, that letter about that sack, that I can't read until it's over
to shoot down everything that is here. ''
- Discreet madam! said Don Quixote. That must have been from reading it slowly
and recreate with it. Go ahead, Sancho: and, while he was in his
necessary, what talks happened with you? What did he ask you about me? And you what
did you answer him? Finish, tell me everything; do not stay in the inkwell one
minimal.
`` She didn't ask me anything, '' said Sancho, `` but I told her in the way that
Your grace, for his service, remained doing penance, naked from the
waist up, tucked between these mountain ranges like a savage, sleeping
on the floor, without eating bread or tablecloths or combing his beard, crying and
cursing his fortune.
`` In saying that I was cursing my fortune, you said wrong, '' said Don Quixote, `` because
before I bless her and I will bless all the days of my life, for having made me
worthy of loving such a tall lady like Dulcinea del Toboso.
"It is so high," answered Sancho, "that in good faith it takes me more than a
preserve.
-Well, how, Sancho? said Don Quixote. Have you measured her?
`` Measure me in this way, '' answered Sancho, `` that, by helping him to put
a sack of wheat on a donkey, we got so close that I noticed
that took me more than a big span.
"Well, it is true," replied Don Quixote, "that it does not accompany that greatness and
adorns with a billion and thanks from the soul! But you won't deny me, Sancho, one
thing: when you got next to her, didn't you feel a Sabae smell, a
aromatic fragrance, and a I do not know what good, that I do not hit dalle
Name? I mean a stink or stink like you're in somebody's store?
curious glove compartment?
"What I can say," said Sancho, "is that I felt a somewhat mannish whiff; and
It must be that she, with the much exercise, was sweaty and something
leathery.
"It would not be that," replied Don Quixote, "but you must have been
romadized, or you must have smelled yourself; because I know well what
smells that rose among thorns, that lily of the field, that amber
disheveled.
-Everything can be -answered Sancho-, that many times that smell comes out of me
that at that time it seemed to me that Senora Dulcinea was leaving his mercy; but
there is no wonder, that one devil looks like another.
`` Well, '' Don Quixote continued, `` behold, he finished cleaning his wheat and
send it to the mill. What did you do when you read the letter?
`` The letter, '' said Sancho, `` did not read it, because he said that he did not know how to read or
to write; Before, he tore it up and made it into tiny pieces, saying that he did not
I wanted to give anyone to read, because their secrets were not known in the place,
and that it was enough what I had spoken to him about the love that
your grace had him and the extraordinary penance that for his cause
was doing. And, finally, he told me to tell at your mercy that
kissed her hands, and that there she was left with more desire to see him than to
write to him; and that, thus, he begged and commanded that, given the present,
come out of those bushes and stop doing nonsense, and
then set off on the way to Toboso, if something else of more importance
it did not happen to him, because he had a great desire to see your mercy. Laughed
a lot when I told him what your honor was called the Knight of the
Sad Figure. I asked him if the vizcaíno of yore had gone there; tell me
that yes, and that he was a very good man. I also asked him about the
galley slaves, but he told me that he had not seen any until then.
"Everything is going well until now," said Don Quixote. But tell me: what jewel was the
What did he give you, when you said goodbye, for the news that you brought him about me? Because it is
used and ancient custom among knights and errant ladies to give to the
squires, maidens or dwarves who bring news of their ladies to them,
to them of their andantes, some rich jewel in happiness, in gratitude
of your errand.
-Well that may be so, and I have it as good use; but that must have
be in the past, that now you just have to get used to giving a
piece of bread and cheese, that this was what my lady Dulcinea gave me, for
the fences of a corral, when I said goodbye to her; and even, by more details, it was
sheep's cheese.
`` He is extremely liberal, '' said Don Quixote, `` and if he didn't give you a gold jewel,
doubt it must have been because he would not have it there at hand to give it to you; but
good are manga after Easter: I will see it, and everything will be satisfied.
Do you know what I'm in awe of, Sancho? That it seems to me that you went and
You came through the air, because a little more than three days it has taken you to come and go
from here to Toboso, having from here to there more than thirty leagues; for the
which I imply that that wise necromancer who has an account with my
things and he is my friend (because by force there is, and there must be, under penalty
that I would not be a good knight errant); I say that this one must have
help walk, without you feeling it; that there are wise of these who take
a knight errant sleeping in his bed, and, without knowing how or in what
Thus, another day dawns more than a thousand leagues from where it fell. If not
It was for this reason that the gentlemen could not help themselves in their dangers.
walking one another, as they help each other at every step. What happens to be one
fighting in the mountains of Armenia with some endriago, or with some fierce
vestiglo, or with another knight, where he takes the worst of the battle and is already
on the verge of death, and when I do not understand you, it appears over there, on top of a
cloud, or on a chariot of fire, another gentleman friend of his, who shortly before
was in England, which favors him and saves him from death, and
At night he is at his inn, dining very much to his liking; and there is usually of the
one to the other two or three thousand leagues. And all this is done by
industry and wisdom of these charming sages who take care of these
brave knights. So, friend Sancho, it does not make me difficult
believe that in such a short time you have come and gone from this place to the
Toboso, then, as I have said, some wise friend must have taken you in
flyers, without you feeling it.
"It would be so," said Sancho; because in good faith that Rocinante was walking as if
it was a gypsy ass with quicksilver in its ears.
-And as if he had quicksilver! Don Quixote said, and even a legion of
demons, which are people who walk and make them walk, without tiring, everything
what they crave. But, putting this aside, what do you think of
What should I do now about what my lady tells me to go to
watch?; that, although I see that I am obliged to fulfill his commandment, see me
also disabled from the gift that I have promised to the princess that with
we come, and the law of chivalry force me to keep my word before
than my taste. On the one hand, the desire to see my mistress haunts me and tires me;
on the other, it incites me and calls me the promised faith and the glory that I have to achieve
in this enterprise. But what I plan to do is walk quickly and arrive
soon where is this giant, and, on arriving, I will cut off his head, and
I will put the princess peacefully in her state, and at once I will turn around
to see the light that my senses shine, to which I will give such apologies that
She comes to consider my delay as good, because she will see that everything redounds in
increase of his glory and fame, because how much I have achieved, I reach and
I will reach for arms in this life, everything comes from the favor that she gives me
da and to be his.
"Oh," said Sancho, "and how is your grace hurt from those helmets!"
Well, tell me, sir: does your grace intend to walk this path in vain, and
let go and lose a so rich and so main marriage like this one,
where they give him a kingdom as a dowry, which I have heard
It has more than twenty thousand leagues in contour, and that it is very abundant of all
the things that are necessary for the sustenance of human life, and that is
greater than Portugal and Castilla together? Street, for God's sake, and have
ashamed of what you've said, and take my advice, and forgive me, and get married
then in the first place that there is cure; and if not, there is ours
graduate, who will do it perfectly. And notice that I am old enough to give
advice, and that this one that I give you comes from a mold, and that it is better to
hand that vulture flying, because whoever has good and badly chooses, no matter how good
get angry don't take revenge.
`` Look, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` if the advice you give me that
case is because he is later king, in killing the giant, and is comfortable to
give you mercies and give you what I promised, let you know that without getting married I will be able to
fulfill your wish very easily, because I will draw from adahala, before
enter the battle, that, coming out the victor over it, since I did not marry, I
They have to give a part of the kingdom, so that I can give it to whoever I want;
and, in giving it to me, who do you want to give it to but yourself?
-That's clear -answered Sancho-, but look at your grace that he chooses it
towards the marina, because, if I am not satisfied with the house, I can embark
my black vassals and make of them what I have already said. And your grace does not
He is cured of going by now to see my lady Dulcinea, if not go kill the
giant, and let's conclude this business; that by God that I settle that has
to be of great honor and of much benefit.
`` Tell you, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` that you are right, and that I must
take your advice as soon as going to the princess before to see
Dulcinea. And let you know not to say anything to anyone, not even those with us
They come from what we have discussed and discussed here; that, well Dulcinea is so
modest who does not want her thoughts to be known, it will not be good for me,
nor another for me, discover them.
`` Well, if that's the case, '' said Sancho, `` how does your grace make all the
who overcomes by his arm are going to appear before my lady Dulcinea, being
This signature of his name that he loves her well and that he is her lover? And, being
Forced that those who are must go to kneel down before his
presence, and say that they go from your mercy to dalle la
obedience, how can the thoughts of both be concealed?
"Oh, how foolish and simple you are!" said Don Quixote. You do not see,
Sancho, that all results in your greatest praise? Because you have to know
that in this our style of chivalry it is a great honor to have a lady
many knights-errant to serve her, without stretching their
thoughts that to servilla, for only being she who she is, without waiting for another
prize of her many good wishes, but may she be content to
accept them for their knights.
-With that way of love -said Sancho- I have heard preach that one has to love
to Our Lord, alone, without being moved by hope of glory or fear
of grief. Although I would like to love and serve him for what I can.
"Damn the devil for a villain," said Don Quixote, "and what discretion
you say at times! It only seems that you have studied.
"Well, by my faith, I can't read," answered Sancho.
In this, Master Nicolás called out to them to wait a little, that they wanted
stopping to drink at a little fountain that was there. Don Quixote stopped,
with no little taste for Sancho, who was already tired of lying so much and feared
his master did not take him at words; because, since he knew that Dulcinea
She was a farmer from Toboso, he had never seen her in his entire life.
At this time, Cardenio had dressed the dresses that Dorotea wore.
when they found it, which, although they were not very good, had a lot of advantage over
those who left. They got off next to the fountain, and with which the priest
accommodated in the sale they satisfied, although little, the great hunger that all
brought.
While at this, a boy happened to pass by on his way, the
which, by looking very carefully at those who were at the source,
from then on he lashed out at Don Quixote, and, embracing him by the legs,
she began to cry very on purpose, saying:
"Oh, my lord!" Doesn't your grace know me? Well take a good look at me, that I am
that young man Andrés who removed your mercy from the oak where he was tied.
Don Quixote recognized him, and, seizing him by the hand, turned to those who were there.
they were and said:
-Because your mercies see how important it is to have gentlemen
wanderers in the world, that the one-eyed and grievances that are
they do for the insolent and bad men who live in it, your
mercedes that in the past days, as I was passing through a forest, I heard some screams and
very pitiful voices, as of a distressed and needy person; i went
then, carried away from my obligation, to the part where it seemed to me that
lamentable voices sounded, and I found this boy tied to an oak tree
now it is in front of (what I have in my soul, because it will be a witness that
won't let me lie about anything); I say I was tied to the oak, naked
half body up, and was whipping him open with the reins of
a mare a villain, who I later learned was his master; and, just as I
I saw, I asked him the cause of such atrocious beating; answered the uncouth that
whipped him because he was his servant, and that certain carelessness that he had
more of a thief than simple; to which this boy said, `` Lord, don't whip me
but because I ask for my salary. '' The master replied I do not know what you harangue and
apologies, which, although they were heard from me, were not admitted. On
resolution, I made him untie, and took an oath to the villain that
he would take with him and pay him one real over another, and even incense. Is not
Is all this true, son Andrés? Didn't you notice with how much empire I sent it to him,
and with what humility he promised to do everything that I imposed on him, and
I notified and wanted? Answer back; do not be disturbed or doubt anything: say what happened
to these gentlemen, because it is seen and considered to be of the benefit that I say
knights-errant on the roads.
"Everything that your grace has said is very true," replied the
boy-, but the end of the business happened quite the opposite of what your
mercy imagines.
-How the other way around? replied Don Quixote; then didn't the villain pay you?
`` Not only did he not pay me, '' replied the boy, `` but, as well as your mercy,
He crossed the forest and we were alone, he tied me again to the same oak, and
He gave me so many lashes again that I was made a flayed Saint Bartholomew;
and, with each spanking he gave me, he would tell me a grace and a smack about making
mockery of your grace, that, unless I felt so much pain, I would laugh at
what did he say. In effect: he stopped me so much that until now I have been healing in
a hospital of evil that the evil villain then made me. Of all of which
It is your fault, because if his path were to go ahead and not
came where they did not call him, or meddle in other people's business, my master
be content with giving me a dozen or two spankings, and then release me and
pay how much he owed me. But, as your grace dishonored him so without
purpose and told him so many villanies, his anger flared, and, of course,
could avenge at your mercy, when he saw himself he only unloaded on me the
cloudy, so it seems to me that I will not be a man in my whole life.
"The damage was," said Don Quixote, "in my leaving there; that there was no
go to leave you paid, because well I should have known, for a long time
experiences, that there is no villain who keeps his word, if he sees
that it is not well to keep it. But you remember, Andrés, that I swore that
If he didn't pay you, that I had to go looking for him, and that I had to find him,
even if it hid in the belly of the whale.
"That's the truth," said Andrés, "but it didn't take any advantage."
"Now you will see if it will be useful," said Don Quixote.
And, saying this, he got up very hastily and ordered Sancho to confront
Rocinante, who was grazing while they ate.
Dorotea asked him what he wanted to do. He replied that he wanted
go find the villain and punish him for such a bad term, and make paid to
Andrés until the last maravedí, in spite and despite how many villains
would be in the world. To which she replied to warn that she could not,
according to the promised gift, meddle in any undertaking until the end of the
hers; and that, since this he knew better than anyone else, that the
chest until the return of his kingdom.
`` That is true, '' answered Don Quixote, `` and Andrés must have
patience until the return, as you, madam, say; that I around him swear
and to promise again not to stop until he is avenged and paid.
"I don't believe those oaths," said Andrés; I'd rather have agora with
what to get to Seville than all the revenges in the world: give me, if you have there,
something to eat and carry, and stay with God his mercy and all the knights
walking; how well walking they are with them as they have been
stop with me.
Sancho took from his spare a piece of bread and another of cheese, and, giving it to him
to the waiter, he said:
-Take, brother Andres, that part of your misfortune reaches us all.
-Well, what part is it for you? Andres asked.
"This part of cheese and bread that I give you," replied Sancho, "God knows
I have to need it or not; because I let you know, friend, that the squires
of knights errant we are subject to great hunger and bad luck,
and even other things that feel better than are said.
Andrés took his bread and cheese, and, seeing that no one was giving him anything else, he went down
his head and took the road in his hands, as they say. Well it's true
who, on leaving, said to Don Quixote:
-For the love of God, gentleman errant, what if I find myself again,
Even if you see that they tear me to pieces, do not help me or help me, but leave me with my
misfortune; that it will not be so much, that the one that will come from your help is not greater
of your mercy, whom God curses, and all those gentlemen
Wanderers have been born into the world.
Don Quixote was going to get up to punish him, but he began to run from
so that none dared to follow him. Don Quixote of the
Andres story, and it was necessary that the others had a lot of account with not
laugh, so as not to finish running at all.
Chapter XXXII. Which is about what happened at the sale to the whole gang
of don Quixote
The good food was over, they saddled up later, and, without anything happening to them
worth counting, another day came for sale, horror and amazement of Sancho
Belly; and, although he wanted not to enter it, he could not escape. The
innkeeper, innkeeper, his daughter and Maritornes, who saw Don Quixote coming
Sancho, came out to greet them with displays of great joy, and he
greeted with grave restraint and applause, and told them to garnish another
better bed than last time; to which the guest replied that as
he would pay her better than the other time, that she would give it to him as princes. Don
Quixote said that he would, and thus, they dressed him a reasonable one in the same
big face of yore, and he went to bed later, because he was very broken and
lacking in judgment.
He had not been well locked up, when the hostess attacked the barber, and,
taking hold of his beard, he said:
-For my santiguada, who has not yet taken advantage of more of my tail for his
beard, and that my tail will turn me; what's up with my husband for those
floors, which is disgraceful; I say, the comb, that I used to hang from my good
line.
The barber did not want to give it to her, although she threw more, until the
The graduate told him to give it to him, that it was no longer necessary to use
that industry, but to be discovered and displayed in the same way, and
tell Don Quixote that when the galley thieves robbed him, he
they had come to that sale fleeing; and what if he asked about the squire
of the princess, they would tell him that she had sent him forward to give notice to
those of her kingdom as she went and carried with her the liberator of all. With
this, the barber willingly gave the tail to the innkeeper, and likewise
returned all the adherents who had lent for the freedom of don
Quixote. All of the sale of Dorothea's beauty were astonished, and
even of the good size of the boy Cardenio. The priest made them dress them with
eat what was in the sale, and the guest, hoping for a better
pay, diligently dressed them a reasonable meal; I was already sleeping
Don Quixote, and they seemed not to wake him up, because it would be more
I would then do sleeping than eating.
They discussed food, with the innkeeper, his wife, his daughter,
Maritornes, all the passengers, of the strange madness of Don Quixote and of the
so they had found him. The hostess told them what with him and with him
muleteer had happened to them, and, looking to see if Sancho was there, as
I did not see him, he told everything about his maintenance, that not a little taste
received. And, as the priest said that the chivalric books that don
Quixote had read they had returned his judgment, said the innkeeper:
-I don't know how that can be; that in truth, as far as I understand it, no
there are better lawyers in the world, and that I have two or three of them there, with others
roles, which have truly given me life, not only to me, but to others
Many. Because, when it is time to harvest, the festivals are gathered here,
many reapers, and there are always some who can read, which takes one
these books in our hands, and let us surround ourselves with more than thirty, and let us
listening with such pleasure that it takes away a thousand gray hair; at least I know about myself
say that when I heard those furious and terrible blows that
Gentlemen hit, that I want to do the same, and that I would like to be
hearing them nights and days.
"And I neither more nor less," said the innkeeper, "because I never have a good time in my life.
house but the one that you are listening to read: that you are so spellbound,
that you do not remember to quarrel then.
"That is the truth," said Maritornes, "and in good faith that I also like
a lot of hearing those things, which are very beautiful; and more, when they tell that
the other lady is under some orange trees hugging her gentleman, and
that an owner is guarding them, dead of envy and with much
shock. I say that this is all a matter of honeys.
"And what do you think, madam maiden?" -said the priest, speaking with the
landlord's daughter.
"I don't know, sir, in my soul," she answered; I also listen to it, and in
It is true that, although I do not understand it, I receive a taste in oil; but i don't like
I from the blows that my father likes, but from the lamentations that
Gentlemen do when they are absent from their ladies: that in truth that
sometimes they make me cry out of compassion for them.
"Then, will you remedy them well, madam maiden," said Dorotea, "if for
will you cry?
"I don't know what he did to me," replied the girl; I just know that there are some
ladies of those so cruel, who call them their tiger knights and
lions and a thousand other filths. And, Jesus, I don't know what people that are
so heartless and so without conscience, that for not looking at an honest man,
they let him die, or go crazy. I don't know what it's so much for
gingerbread: if they are honest, marry them, they do not want
another thing.
`` Hush, girl, '' said the innkeeper, `` you seem to know a lot about these things, and
it is not right for maidens to know or talk so much.
`` As this gentleman asks me, '' she replied, `` I couldn't stop
respondlle.
`` Now then, '' said the priest, `` bring me, Mr. Guest, these books,
I want to see.
"May I please," he replied.
And, entering his room, he took out of it an old briefcase, closed with a
chain, and, opening it, found in it three large books and some papers
of very good handwriting, handwritten. The first book he opened he saw that it was
Don Cirongilio of Thrace; and the other, from Felixmarte de Hircania; and the other,
the History of the Great Captain Gonzalo Hernández de Córdoba, with the life of
Diego García de Paredes. Just as the priest read the first two titles,
he turned his face to the barber and said:
-The mistress of my friend and his niece make us here now.
`` They don't, '' replied the barber, `` I also know how to take them to the corral or to
Fireplace; that in truth there is very good fire in it.
"Then, does your grace want to burn more books?" said the innkeeper.
`` No more, '' said the priest, `` than these two: Don Cirongilio's and
Felixmarte.
-Well, by chance -said the innkeeper- my books are heretics or phlegmatic,
who wants to burn them?
"Schismatics, my friend," said the barber, "not phlegmatic."
"That's right," replied the innkeeper; but if anyone wants to burn, be that of the Great
Captain and wish Diego García, who before I will let burn a son to leave
burn none of us.
"My brother," said the priest, "these two books are liars and they are full
of nonsense and follies; And this of the Great Captain is true history, and
has the facts of Gonzalo Hernández de Córdoba, who, due to his many and
great feats, he deserved to be called Great Captain all over the world,
famous and clear renown, and of him only deserved. And this Diego García from
Paredes was a leading gentleman, a native of the city of Trujillo, in
Estremadura, most courageous soldier, and of so many natural forces that
with a finger a mill wheel in the middle of its fury; and, put with a
upright at the entrance of a bridge, stopped a whole countless
army, not to go through it; and did other such things that, as if he
He tells them and writes them himself, with the modesty of a gentleman and
his own coroner, would be written by another, free and dispassionate, put into
his oblivion those of the Hétores, Achilles and Roldanes.
"Take yourselves to my father!" said the innkeeper said. Look at what he is scared of:
to stop a mill wheel! By God, now there was your mercy
read what Felixmarte de Hircania did, who only split five
giants at the waist, as if they were made of beans, as the
friars that children make. And again he lashed out with a huge and
very powerful army, where it carried more than one million and six hundred thousand
soldiers, all armed from head to toe, and dismantled them at
all, as if they were herds of sheep. Well, what will they tell me about the good of
Don Cirongilio de Thracia, who was as brave and courageous as will be seen in the
book, where he tells that, navigating a river, he left the middle of the
water a serpent of fire, and he, as he saw her, threw himself on her, and
straddled his scaly backs, and squeezed him tightly.
both hands to the throat, with such force that, seeing the snake that
He was drowning, he had no choice but to let himself go to the depths of the river,
taking after the knight, who never wanted to let go? And when
They got down there, he found himself in some palaces and in such beautiful gardens
that it was wonderful; and then the serpent turned into an old old man, who
He said so many things that there is nothing more to hear. Street, sir, what if you heard
this, he would go crazy with pleasure. Two figs for the Great Captain and for
that Diego García who says!
Hearing this, Dorotea said silently to Cardenio:
-Our guest has little to do to do the second part of Don
Quixote.
`` So it seems to me, '' replied Cardenio, `` because, according to the indications, he
It is certain that everything that these books tell happened neither more nor less
who write it, and barefoot friars will not make you believe otherwise.
`` Look, brother, '' the priest started to say, `` there was no Felixmarte in the world.
of Hyrcania, nor Don Cirongilio of Thrace, nor other similar gentlemen
that chivalric books tell, because everything is composure and fiction
of idle devices, which were composed for the effect that you say of
entertain time, as your reapers entertain it by reading them;
because I really swear to you that such gentlemen were never in the world, nor
such exploits and foolishness happened to him.
-To another dog with that bone! replied the innkeeper. As if i dont
I knew how many there are five and where my shoe pinches me! Do not think your
Please give me mush, because by God I'm not white at all. Good is that
want to give me your grace to understand that everything that these good
books tell be nonsense and lies, being printed with license from the
lords of the Royal Council, as if they were people who had to leave
print so many lies together, and so many battles and so many enchantments that
take away the judgment!
`` I have already told you, friend, '' replied the priest, `` that this is done to entertain
our idle thoughts; and, as it is consented in the republics
well arranged that there are games of chess, ball and tricks, to
entertain some who neither have, nor must, nor can work, thus
agrees to print and have such books, believing, as is true, that
there must not be any so ignorant that they have as true history
none of these books. And if it were lawful for me now, and the audience
required, I would say things about what the books of
chivalry to be good, that perhaps they would be of benefit and even of taste
for some; but I hope that the time will come when I can communicate it
with whom I can remedy it, and in the meantime believe, Mr. innkeeper,
that I have told you, and take your books, and there come to you with their truths
or lies, and good profit they do you, and God forbid you don't limp on your foot
that your guest, Don Quixote, limps.
`` Not that, '' replied the innkeeper, `` I will not be so crazy that it makes me
knight errant: how well I see that now what was used in
that time, when it is said that these famous
gentlemen.
Halfway through this talk, Sancho was present, and he was very confused and
Thoughtful of what he had heard said that knights were not used now
errant, and that all the books of chivalry were nonsense and lies,
and he proposed in his heart to wait for his master's journey to stop,
and that if he did not leave with the happiness that he thought, he determined to leave him and
return with his wife and children to his customary work.
The innkeeper took the suitcase and the books, but the priest told him:
-Wait, I want to see what papers are those that have such good handwriting
writings.
The guest took them out, and, giving them to read, he even saw a work of eight sheets
handwritten, and at the beginning they had a big title that said: Novel
of the impertinent curious. The priest read three or four lines to himself and
said:
-It is true that the title of this novel does not seem bad, and that it comes to me
leella will all.
To which the innkeeper replied:
-Well, you may well read your reverence, because I let you know that some
Guests who have read it here have been very happy, and have asked me
with many truths; but I have not wanted to give it to him, thinking of giving it back to
who here left this forgotten suitcase with these books and papers; that
It may well be that its owner will return here some time, and, although I know that
I must have the books, in faith that I have to return them: that, although
landlord, I'm still a Christian.
`` You are very right, friend, '' said the priest, `` but with all that, if the
novel makes me happy, you have to let me transfer it.
"Very willingly," replied the innkeeper.
While they were both saying this, Cardenio had taken the novel and started
read in it; and, seeming to him the same as the priest, he begged him to read it
so that everyone would hear it.
"If I read," said the priest, "if it weren't better to spend this time sleeping
than in reading.
"It will be plenty of rest for me," said Dorotea, "to entertain the time by listening to some
I count, because I still do not have the spirit so calm that it allows me to sleep
when it was right.
"Well, unfortunately," said the priest, "I want to read it, even out of curiosity;
maybe it will have some taste.
Master Nicolás came to beg him the same, and Sancho also; which seen
of the priest, and understanding that everyone would be happy and he would welcome him, he said:
-Well, that's right, all of you pay attention to me, that the novel begins in this way:
Chapter XXXIII. Where the novel of the impertinent curious is told
«In Florence, a rich and famous city in Italy, in the province they call
Tuscany, lived Anselmo and Lotario, two wealthy and leading gentlemen, and
so friends that, par excellence and antonomasia, of all who knew them
the two friends were called. They were single, young men of the same age and
the same customs; all of which was quite a cause for the two of them with
reciprocal friendship would reciprocate. It is true that the Anselmo was
somewhat more inclined to love pastimes than Lothair, to whom
they had after them those of the hunt; but, when it was offered, Anselmo left
go to their tastes to follow Lothair's, and Lothair left his
for going to Anselmo's; and, in this way, they walked so closely
wills, that he had not arranged a watch to do so.
»Anselmo was lost in love with a principal and beautiful maiden of the
the same city, the daughter of such good parents and herself so good, that she
determined, with the opinion of his friend Lothario, without which nothing
he did, as a wife to his parents, and thus put it into execution; and the
who led the embassy was Lotario, and the one who concluded the business so comfortably
of his friend, who in a short time found himself in the possession he desired,
and Camila so happy to have reached Anselmo for her husband, that she did not
ceased to give thanks to heaven, and to Lothario, through whom so much good
I had come.
»The first days, like all wedding days are usually happy, he continued
Lotario, as he used to, the house of his friend Anselmo, trying to honor him,
celebrate him and rejoice him with all that was possible for him; but,
the weddings finished and the frequency of visits and congratulations calmed down,
Lothario began to carefully neglect his affairs at Anselmo's house,
for appearing to him -as it is reason that it seems to all who are
discreet- that the houses of friends are not to be visited or continued
married in the same way as when they were single; because, although the
good and true friendship cannot and should not be suspicious in anything, with
All this, the honor of the married is so delicate, that it seems that one can
offend even of the same brothers, how much more of the friends.
Anselmo noticed the remission of Lothario, and made great complaints about him,
telling him that if he knew that getting married was to be part of
tell him like he used to, that he never would have done it, and that if, for the good
correspondence the two had while he was single, they had
reached such a sweet name as that of being called the two friends, which
allowed, for wanting to do the circumspect, without any other occasion,
that such a famous and pleasant name was lost; and that so, I begged him,
if it was lawful for such a term of speaking to be used among them, let it return
to be lord of his house, and to enter and leave it as before,
assuring him that his wife Camila had no other taste or will than
the one he wanted her to have, and that, because she knew how many
You see, the two loved each other, I was confused to see so much elusiveness in him.
»To all these and many other reasons that Anselmo told Lotario for
persuade him to return home as usual, replied Lothario with as much
prudence, discretion and warning, that Anselmo was satisfied with the good
intention of his friend, and they were in concert that two days a week and
the parties were Lotario to eat with him; and, although this remained like this
agreed between the two, Lothario proposed not to do more than
saw that it was more convenient to the honor of his friend, whose credit he esteemed in
more than his own. He said, and he said well, that the married man whom he
Heaven had granted a beautiful woman, so much care had to be taken
friends took to his house as in looking with what friends his wife conversed,
because what is not done or concerted in the squares, or in the temples, or
at public festivals, or stations - things that not always have to be
deny husbands to their wives-, is arranged and facilitated at the home of the
friend or relative whose most satisfaction you have.
»Lotario also said that married people needed to have each
some friend who warned him of the carelessness that he might make in his conduct,
because it usually happens that with the much love that the husband to the wife
has, or does not warn her or does not tell her, so as not to anger her, to do or stop
do some things, whether he does it or not, would be honorable or
vituperation; of which, being the friend warned, I would easily put
remedy in everything. But where can you find a friend so discreet and so loyal and
true as here Lothario asks? I don't know, by the way; only Lotario
was this, who with all solicitude and warning looked out for the honor of his
friend and tried to dezmar, frize and shorten the days of the concert of going to
his house, because it did not seem bad to the idle vulgar and the wandering eyes and
malicious the entrance of a rich young man, gentleman and well-born, and of
good parts that he thought he had, in the house of such a beautiful woman
like Camila; that, since his goodness and courage could put a stop to all
cursing tongue, he still didn't want to question his credit or that of his
friend, and for this reason most of the days of the concert were occupied and
he entertained in other things, which he implied to be inexcusable. A) Yes
that, in complaints from one and apologies from the other, they spent a lot of time and
parts of the day.
"It happened, then, that one of the two of them was walking in a meadow outside
of the city, Anselmo told Lotario the similar reasons:
»-You were thinking, friend Lothario, that the favors that God has given me in
make me the son of such parents as were mine and by giving me, not by hand
scarce, goods, both those called nature and fortune,
I cannot reciprocate with gratitude that it reaches the well received, and
about the one who made me give you as a friend and Camila as his own wife:
two garments that I estimate, if not to the degree that I owe, in which I can.
Well, with all these parts, which are usually the whole with which men
they usually and can live happily, I live the most jilted and the most
bland man from all over the world universe; because I don't know what days to this
part tires me and squeezes a desire so strange, and so out of common use
of others, that I marvel at myself, and blame and scold myself alone, and
I try to shut it up and hide it from my own thoughts; and so I have
it has been possible to come up with this secret as if the industry were trying to
to all the world. And, well, in effect, he has to go out to the square, I want him to
be in the file of your secret, confident that, with him and with the
diligence that you will put, as my true friend, in remedying me, I will see myself
soon free of the anguish that causes me, and my joy will come for your
request to the degree that my discontent with my madness has reached.
»Suspense had Anselmo's reasons for Lotario, and he did not know what
to stop so long prevention or preamble; and, although he was stirring in his
imagination what desire could be the one that tired his friend so much, gave
always very far from the target of truth; and, to leave the agony quickly
that caused him that suspension, told him that he made a notorious offense to his
a lot of friendship in looking for detours to tell him his most covert
thoughts, as he was certain that one could promise him, or already advice
to entertain them, or a remedy for compliments.
"" That is the truth, "answered Anselmo," and with that confidence I let you know,
friend Lotario, that the desire that tires me is to think if Camila, my wife,
it is as good and as perfect as I think; and I can not find out in this
true, if not by testing it in such a way that the test shows the carats
of his goodness, as fire shows those of gold. Because I have for myself,
Oh friend! She is not a better woman than she is or is not requested,
and that that alone is strong that does not bend to promises, to gifts,
to the tears and the continuous importunities of the solicitous lovers.
Because, what is there to be thankful for, he said, that a woman is good, if no one
tell her to be bad? How much is collected and fearful that she does not
give an opportunity to let go, and the one who knows she has a husband who, in
catching it in the first unwrap, does it take its life? I crave that,
the one that is good out of fear, or lack of place, I don't want to have it in
that esteem in which I will have the requested and persecuted
maturity crown. So, for these reasons and for many other reasons
What could I tell you to accredit and strengthen the opinion I have,
I hope that Camila, my wife, goes through these difficulties and
carat in the fire of being required and requested, and of who has value
to put your wishes into it; And if she comes out, as I think she will, with the
palm this battle, I will have my luck without equal; can i say that
the emptiness of my desires is full; I will say that the woman was lucky
strong, of whom the Sage says who will find? And when this happens
Contrary to what I think, with the pleasure of seeing that I was right in my opinion,
I will carry without grief the reason that my so costly experience may cause me.
And, I suppose that nothing you say to me against my desire
It must be of some benefit to stop putting him for the work, I want, oh
friend Lotario !, that you prepare to be the instrument that carves this
work of my taste; that I will give you room to do it, without missing everything
what I see to be necessary to request an honest woman,
honest, collected and disinterested. And move me, among other things, to trust
You are such an arduous undertaking, to see that if Camila is defeated by you,
to reach maturity at all costs and rigor, but only to take it for granted
what has to be done, out of good respect; and thus, I will not be offended anymore
of desire, and my injury will be hidden in the virtue of your
silence, I know well that what I will have to be eternal like that of
death. So if you want me to have life I can say it is
of course you have to enter this loving battle, not lukewarm or
lazily, but with the zeal and diligence that my desire calls for, and with the
trust that our friendship assures me.
These were the reasons Anselmo told Lotario, to all of which
was so attentive, that if they were not the ones that are written that he said, no
he spread his lips until he had finished; and, seeing that he said no more,
after he was looking at a good space, as if he were looking at something other than
He would never have seen, that caused him admiration and fright, he said:
»-I cannot persuade myself, my friend Anselmo!
What did you say; that, to think that you were really saying them, I would not consent to
So far ahead you will pass, because not listening to you will prevent your long harangue.
Without a doubt I imagine, or that you do not know me, or that I do not know you. But no; that
I know well that you are Anselmo, and you know that I am Lotario; the damage is in
that I think you are not the Anselmo you used to be, and you must have
thinking that I am not the Lothair I should be either, because the things that
you told me, neither are my friend Anselmo's, nor have the ones you asked me
to ask that Lothair that you know; because good friends have to
to test his friends and make use of them, as a poet said, usque ad aras;
which meant that they were not to use their friendship in things that were
against God. Well, if this felt a gentle friendship, how much better is it
let the Christian feel it, who knows that no human should lose the
divine friendship? And when the friend threw the bar so much that he put aside
respects from heaven for going to his friend's, it should not be for things
light and of little moment, but for those in which honor and life go
of his friend. Well, tell me now, Anselmo: which of these two things do you have in
danger for me to venture to please you and do such a thing
detestable as you ask me? None, by the way; before, you ask me, according to me
I understand, that I try and request to take away your honor and life, and take it away
me together. Because if I have to try to take away your honor, of course
that I take your life, because a man without honor is worse than a dead man; and,
being me the instrument, as you want me to be, of so much your evil,
Have I not come to be disgraced, and, consequently, lifeless?
Listen, friend Anselmo, and be patient not to answer me until I finish
to tell you what is offered to me about what your desire has asked of you;
what time will be left for you to reply to me and I listen to you.
"" May I please, "said Anselmo," say what you want. "
And Lothair continued saying:
»-It seems to me, oh Anselmo! That you now have the wit like the one
always have the Moors, to whom the
error of his sect with the annotations of Holy Scripture, nor with reasons
that consist of speculation of the understanding, nor that are based on
articles of faith, but they should bring you tangible, easy examples,
intelligible, demonstrative, indubitable, with mathematical proofs
that cannot be denied, as when they say: "If two equal parts
we remove equal parts, those that remain are also equal "; and, when
They do not understand this word, as, in effect, they do not understand it, give them
show with your hands and put it in front of your eyes, and, even with everything
this, nobody with them is enough to persuade them the truths of my sacred
religion. And this same term and manner will be convenient for me to use with you, because the
I wish that in you was born goes so wrong and so out of all that
that has a shadow of reasonable, that it seems to me that it must be time wasted
the one who will occupy in letting you understand your simplicity, which for now will not
I want to give another name, and I'm still about to leave you in your folly, in pain of
your bad wish; but he does not let me use the friendship that I have for you, the
who does not allow me to leave you in such a manifest danger of losing yourself.
And, because of course you can see it, tell me, Anselmo: haven't you told me that I have
request a withdrawal, persuade an honest, offer a
disinterested, serve a prudent one? Yes you told me. Well if you
You know you have a retired, honest, disinterested and prudent woman, what
are you looking for? And if you think that of all my assaults it has to come out the victor, like
will come out without a doubt, what better titles do you intend to give it later than those that
now has, or what will be more after what is now? Or is it that you don't
you have for what you say, or you do not know what you ask. If you don't have it so
What do you say, why do you want to try it, if not, like a bad thing, do the
What else will you like? But if it's as good as you think, impertinent
thing will be to experience the same truth, because, after it is done,
You have to stay with the estimate you first had. So it's reason
conclusively that trying the things of which before can happen to us
harm that benefit is from speechless and reckless judgments, and more when
want to try those to which they are neither forced nor compelled, and which very
far they bring us to discover that trying them is manifest madness. Things
Difficulties are attempted by God, or by the world, or by both:
those that are attacked by God are those that were attacked by the saints,
undertaking to live the life of angels in human bodies; the ones that rush
out of respect for the world are those of those who spend so many
water, so much diversity of climates, so much strangeness of people, to acquire
these they call wealth assets. And those that are tried by God and by him
world together are those of the brave soldiers, who hardly see in
the opposite wall opened as much space as is the one that could make a
round artillery bullet, when, put aside all fear, without making
speech or warn of the manifest danger that threatens them, carried in
flight of the wings of the desire to return for his faith, for his nation and for his
king, they fearlessly hurl themselves for half a thousand competing kills
waiting for you. These things are usually tried, and it is honor,
glory and profit trying them, although so full of inconveniences and
dangers. But the one that you say you want to try and implement,
has to achieve glory of God, goods of fortune, or fame with the
mens; because, since you go out with her as you wish, you do not have to
neither more proud, nor richer, nor more honored than you are now; and if you don't go out,
you have to see yourself in the greatest misery imaginable, because
take advantage of thinking then that nobody knows the misfortune that has
happened, because it will be enough to afflict you and make you know it yourself.
And, to confirm this truth, I want to tell you a stay that the
famous poet Luis Tansilo, at the end of his first part of The Tears of
Saint Peter, who says like this:
The pain grows and the shame grows
in Peter, when the day has shown itself;
and, although he does not see anyone there, he is ashamed
of himself, to see that he had sinned:
that to a magnanimous breast to be ashamed
Not only does being looked at must move him;
who is ashamed of himself when he errs,
Although another does not see that heaven and earth.
So, you will not excuse your pain with the secret; before, you will have to cry
I continue, if not tears from the eyes, tears of blood from the heart, like
that simple doctor that our poet tells us that made the
test of the glass, which, with a better speech, was excused from making the prudent
Reinaldos; which, since that is poetic fiction, has in itself
locked up moral secrets worthy of being noticed and understood and
imitated. The more that, with what I am now going to tell you, will you
come to know the big mistake you want to make. Tell me, Anselmo,
if heaven, or good luck, had made you lord and rightful owner
of a very fine diamond, of whose goodness and carats they were satisfied
how many lapidaries saw him, and that all with one voice and in common
They said that it arrived in carats, goodness and finesse to what could be extended
the nature of such a stone, and you yourself believed so, without knowing another
On the contrary, would it be fair that it came to you wanting to take that
diamond, and put it between an anvil and a hammer, and there, by sheer force
of blows and arms, test if it is as hard and as fine as they say? And more, yes
you put it to work; that, in case the stone made resistance to
such a foolish test, not for that would add more value or more fame; and if i know
broke, which could be, wouldn't it all be lost? Yes by the way
leaving its owner in estimation that everyone considers him simple. Then
do account, Anselmo friend, that Camila is a very fine diamond, so in your
estimation as in that of others, and that there is no reason to put it in contingency of
that it breaks, because, even if it remains with its integrity, it cannot rise to more
value of what it now has; and if it is missing and does not resist, consider from
now which one would you be without it, and with what reason could you complain about yourself
same, for having been the cause of their downfall and yours. Look there is no jewel
in the world that is worth as much as the chaste and honest woman, and that all
The honor of women consists in the good opinion that one has of them; and,
Well, your wife's is such that it reaches the extreme of goodness that you know, for
what do you want to question this truth? Look, my friend, that woman is an animal
imperfect, and that she should not be pregnant where she stumbles and falls,
but take them off and clear the way of any inconvenience, to
that without regret it runs lightly to reach the perfection that it lacks, that
It consists in being virtuous. The natives say that the Arminian is a
little animal that has very white skin, and that when they want to hunt it, the
hunters use this artifice: that, knowing the parts where they usually
pass and go, they stop them with mud, and then, eyeing him, they direct him
towards that place, and just as the Arminian reaches the mud, he is staying and
let it be captivated and captivated, in exchange for not going through the mud and losing and
dirtying her whiteness, which esteems her more than liberty and life. The
Honest and chaste woman is Arminian, and is more than clean white snow
virtue of honesty; and the one who wants not to lose it, first the
keep and conserve, it has to be used in a different style than with the Arminian
is had, because they should not put before him the mire of gifts and
services of importunate lovers, because perhaps, and even without perhaps, no
has so much natural virtue and strength that it can by itself run over and
go through those pregnancies, and it is necessary to take them off and put them in front
the cleanliness of virtue and beauty that good fame contains. It is
I assimilate the good woman as a mirror of shining and clear glass; but this
subject to fogging up and darkening with whatever breath touches it. Hase
to use with the honest woman the style that with the relics: to adore them and
do not touch them. Have to keep and esteem the good woman as it is kept and
esteem a beautiful garden that is full of flowers and roses, whose owner does not
he allows no one to walk or touch him; it is enough that from afar, and between
iron gates, enjoy their fragrance and beauty. Finally,
I want to tell you some verses that have come to my memory, that I heard them in
a modern comedy, which I think they do for the purpose of what we are
trying. One wise old man advised another, the father of a maiden, that
collect it, keep it and lock it up, and among other reasons, he said these:
The woman is made of glass;
but it is not to be proved
whether or not it can be broken,
because everything could be.
And it's easier to break
and it is not sanity to wear
in danger of breaking
what cannot be welded.
And in this opinion they are
all, and in reason I found it:
that if there are Danaes in the world,
there are pluvias of gold too.
How much I have told you so far, oh Anselmo! It has been because of what you
touches; and now it is good that something is heard of what is good for me; what if
be long, forgive me, that everything requires the labyrinth where you have
entered and where you want me to get you. You have me as a friend and
you want to take away my honor, which is against all friendship; and still not only
you want this, but you try to get me to take it away from you. That I
you want to remove it from me it is clear, then, when Camila sees that I request it,
As you ask me, it is true that he must have me as a man without honor and evil
looked, well, I try and do something so out of the question that being who
I am and your friendship forces me. That you want me to take it away from you, there is no
doubt, because, seeing Camila that I request her, she must think that I have
seen in her some lightness that gave me the dare to discover my evil
wish; and, considering yourself dishonored, it is your turn, as your own, your
the same disgrace. And from here comes what is commonly talked about: that the husband
of the adulterous woman, since he did not know it or gave an opportunity to
that his wife is not the one who should, nor was it in his hand, nor in his carelessness
and little modesty to hinder his misfortune, yet, they call him and name him with
vituperative name and bass; and in a certain way they look at him, those who evil
of his wife they know, with eyes of contempt, instead of looking at him with those of
pity, seeing that not because of his fault, but because of the taste of his bad
companion, is in that misadventure. But I want to tell you the cause why
with just reason the husband of the bad woman is dishonored, although he does not know
that it is, nor is it guilty, nor has it been part of, nor given the opportunity, so that
she is. And do not get tired of hearing me, that everything has to redound to your
advantage. When God raised our first father in Earthly Paradise,
Divine Scripture says that God instilled sleep in Adam, and that, being
sleeping, he took out a rib from the sinister side, from which he formed
our mother Eva; And, just as Adam woke up and looked at her, he said: `` This is
flesh of my flesh and bone of my bones. '' And God said: `` For this he will leave
man to his father and mother, and they will be two in one flesh. '' And so
the divine sacrament of marriage was instituted, with such ties that
only death can unleash them. And this one has so much strength and virtue
miraculous sacrament, which makes two different people the same
meat; and it does even more in the good married, who, although they have two souls,
they have no more than one will. And from here comes that, like the meat of the
wife be the same with her husband's, the stains that fall on her, or the
defects that are sought, redound in the flesh of the husband, although he has not
given, as has been said, occasion for that damage. Because just like the pain
the foot or any member of the human body feels the whole body,
for being all of the same flesh, and the head feels the ankle damage,
without her having caused it, so the husband is a participant in the
dishonor of the woman, for being the same thing with her. And how you honor and
dishonors of the world are all and are born of flesh and blood, and those of the
bad women are of this gender, it is necessary that the husband has a part
dellas, and be held dishonored without his knowing it. Look then, oh
Anselmo! To the danger that you put yourself in wanting to disturb the calm in which you
good wife lives. See how vain and impertinent curiosity you want
stir the humors that are now calm in the chest of your breed
wife. Warn that what you venture to win is little, and that what
you will lose it will be so much that I will leave it at its point, because I lack words
to make it more expensive. But if everything I have said is not enough to move you from your evil
purpose, you may well seek another instrument of your disgrace and misfortune,
that I do not intend to be, although for that reason I lose your friendship, which is the greatest
loss I can imagine.
In saying this, the virtuous and prudent Lothair fell silent, and Anselmo was
so confused and thoughtful that for a good space he could not answer
word; but, finally, he said:
»-With the attention you have seen, I have heard, Lothario friend, how much you have
wanted to tell me, and in your reasons, examples and comparisons I have seen the
much discretion you have and the edge of true friendship that
you reach; and I anxiously see and confess that if I don't follow your opinion and I'll go
after mine, I am fleeing from good and running after evil. Budget
This, you have to consider that I now suffer from the disease that they usually have
some women, who crave dirt, plaster, charcoal, and other things
worse, even disgusting to look at, the more to eat; So it is
need to use some device for me to heal, and this could be done
with ease, only if you begin, albeit warm and feigned, to
request Camila, who must not be so tender that the first
encounters with your honesty on the ground; and with only this principle
I will be happy and you will have fulfilled what you owe to our friendship,
not only giving me life, but persuading me not to see myself dishonored. AND
you are obliged to do this for one reason alone; and it is that, being me, like
I am determined to discuss this test, you have not to consent
that I give an account of my folly to another person, with what I would put on an adventure
the honor that you try not to lose; and, when yours is not in the
point it owes in Camila's intention as long as you request it,
It matters little or nothing, because briefly, seeing in it the integrity that
we hope, you will be able to tell him the pure truth of our artifice, with which
your credit will return by being first. And, well, so little adventures and so much
happy you can give me venturing, do not stop doing it, although more
inconveniences are put before you, because, as I have already said, with only that
begin I will conclude the cause.
Seeing Lothario Anselmo's resolute will, and not knowing what else
examples bring you or what more reasons to show you for not following her, and
seeing that he threatened to give another account of his bad desire, to avoid
greater evil, determined to please him and do what he asked, with purpose
and intention to guide that business so that, without altering the
thoughts of Camila, Anselmo was satisfied; and so, he replied that
not communicate his thought with someone else, which he took at his charge
that company, which he would start when he liked it better.
Anselmo embraced him tenderly and lovingly, and thanked him for his offer, as
if some great favor had done him; and they agreed between the
two that from another day the work began; that he would give
place and time in which he could speak to Camila alone, and likewise
He would give money and jewels to give and to offer. He advised her to give him
music, that he wrote verses in his praise, and that, when he did not want
take work to make them, he would do them himself. Lothario offered himself to everything,
well with a different intention than Anselmo thought.
»And with this agreement they returned to Anselmo's house, where they found Camila
eagerly and carefully, waiting for her husband, because that day
come more than usual.
Lotario went home, and Anselmo stayed at his house, as happy as he was.
Lotario was thoughtful, not knowing what plan to give to get out of that
cheeky business. But that night he thought about the way he would have to
fool Anselmo, without offending Camila; and another day he came to eat with his
friend, and was well received by Camila, who received him and gave him
a lot of will, to understand the good that her husband had for her.
They finished eating, they lifted the tablecloths and Anselmo told Lotario to
stay there with Camila, while he went to a forced business, which
he would be back in an hour and a half. Camila begged him not to leave and Lotario left.
He offered to keep him company, but he took advantage of nothing with Anselmo; before,
bothered Lothario to stay and wait for him, because he had to try
with him a thing of great importance. He also told Camila not to leave
only to Lothario as long as he returned. In fact, he knew so well to pretend
the need, or foolishness, of his absence, that no one could understand what
feigned. Anselmo left, and Camila and Lotario were left alone at the table, because
the other people from the house had all gone to eat. Viose Lotario put on
the lurch that his friend desired and with the enemy in front, that he could
defeat a squad of armed knights with only his beauty: look if
It was reason that Lothario feared him.
But what he did was put his elbow on the arm of the chair and his hand
open on the cheek, and, apologizing to Camila for the bad restraint,
He said he wanted to rest a bit while Anselmo returned. Camila
He replied that he would better rest on the dais than on the chair, and thus, he begged him
went to sleep in it. Lotario refused, and there he fell asleep until
Anselmo returned, who, as he found Camila in his room and Lotario
sleeping, he believed that, since it had taken so long, they would have already had the
two places to speak, and even to sleep, and did not see the hour when Lothair
woke up, to turn with him outside and ask him about his luck.
»Everything happened to him as he wanted: Lotario woke up, and then the two of them left
from home, and thus, he asked him what he wanted, and Lotario replied that he did not
It had seemed to him to be good that the first time it was completely discovered; and
Thus, he had done nothing but praise Camila for being beautiful, telling her
that the whole city was not about anything other than its beauty and
discretion, and that this had seemed like a good beginning to enter winning
will, and arranging for her to listen to him again with pleasure, using
in this of the artifice that the devil uses when he wants to deceive someone who
He is placed in a watchtower of looking for himself: that he is transformed into an angel of light,
being he of darkness, and, putting before him good appearances, at the end
discover who he is and leave with his intention, if at first it is not
discovered their deception. All this pleased Anselmo very much, and he said that
every day I would give the same place, even if I did not leave the house, because there
he would occupy himself in things that Camila could not come to his knowledge of.
artifice.
"It happened, then, that many days passed that, without saying a word to Lothair
Camila, answered Anselmo that he spoke to her and could never get a
small sample of coming in anything that was bad, not even giving a
shadow sign of hope; Before, he said that he threatened him that if from that
A bad thought did not go away, that she had to say it to her husband.
"" He is well, "said Anselmo. So far Camila has resisted words;
It is necessary to see how it resists the works: I will give you two thousand escudos tomorrow
of gold so that you offer it to them, and even give it to them, and as many
that you buy jewels with which to bait it; that women tend to be fond of,
and more if they are beautiful, no matter how chaste they are, to this of getting along and
walk galanas; and if she resists this temptation, I will be satisfied and
I will not give you more grief.
»Lotario replied that since it had begun, that he would carry it to the end
that company, since he understood to leave it tired and defeated. Other
day he received the four thousand shields, and with them four thousand confusions,
because he didn't know what to say to lie again; but, in effect, it determined
to tell him that Camila was as keen on gifts and promises as she was on
words, and that there was no reason to tire more, because all the time
spent in vain.
But luck, which led things differently, ordered that, having
Anselmo left Lotario and Camila alone, as he used to at other times, he
locked in a room and through the keyholes he was looking and
listening to what the two of them were talking about, and saw that in more than half an hour Lotario
He did not speak a word to Camila, nor would he speak it if he were there for a century, and
he realized that how much his friend had told him about the answers
Everything about Camila was fiction and lies. And, to see if this was what it was, he came out
of the room, and, calling Lothario aside, asked him what news there was and
what temper was Camila. Lotario replied that he no longer intended to give
a point in that business, because he responded so harshly and blandly, that
he would not have the courage to say anything to her again.
»-Ah! said Anselmo, "Lotario, Lotario, and how badly do you correspond to what
You already owe me how much I trust you! Now I've been looking at you for the
place that grants the entry of this key, and I have seen that you have not said
word to Camila, whereby I imply that even the first few
you have to say; And if this is so, as it certainly is, why should I
you cheat, or why do you want to take away with your industry the means that I
could I find to get my wish?
Anselmo did not say more, but what he had said was enough to let him run and
confused Lothario; which, almost as if taking as a point of honor having
found in a lie, he swore to Anselmo that from that moment he took so much
in charge of the contentalle and not chin, which would see if with curiosity
I spied; how much more, that it would not be necessary to use any diligence,
because the one that he thought to put in satisfacelle would take away from all
suspicion. Anselmo believed him, and to give him safer comfort and less
startled, she determined to be absent from home for eight days, leaving
to that of a friend of his, who was in a village, not far from the city, with
which friend arranged to send him to call with many truths, to have
occasion with Camila of her departure.
"Wretched and ill advised of you, Anselmo! What are you doing? What is it
what you trace? what do you command? Look what you do against yourself
plotting your disgrace and ordering your doom. Good is your wife Camila,
you still and calmly possess it, no one surprises your taste, its
thoughts do not come out of the walls of his house, you are his heaven in the
earth, the target of your desires, the fulfillment of your tastes and the measure
where he measures his will, adjusting it in everything with yours and with that of the
heaven. Well, if the mine of his honor, beauty, honesty and recollection
gives without any work all the wealth he has and you can wish, for
do you want to dig the earth and look for new veins again and never seen
treasure, putting you in danger that everything comes down, well, in short,
does it sustain on the feeble harnesses of its skinny nature? Look that the one
seeks the impossible it is fair that the possible is denied, as he said best
a poet, saying:
I look for life in death,
health in sickness,
in prison freedom,
in the closed exit
and in the traitorous loyalty.
But my luck, whose
I never expect any good
with the sky has statute
that, well, the impossible I ask,
the possible still do not give me.
»Anselmo went to the village another day, leaving Camila told that time
that he was absent, Lotario would come to look around his house and eat with
she; that he be careful of treating him as his own person. Grieved
Camila, as a discreet and honest woman, of the order that her husband left her,
and told him to warn that it was not right for anyone, he absent, to occupy
the chair of her table, and what if he did it because he did not have confidence that she
he would know how to govern his house, which he would try for that time, and he would see for
Experience as for senior care was enough. Anselmo replied that
That was his taste, and that he had nothing to do but lower his head and
obey him. Camila said that she would do it, although against her will.
»Anselmo left, and another day Lotario came to his house, where he was re-conceived.
from Camila with loving and honest welcome; which was never put in part
where Lotario saw her alone, because she was always surrounded by her
servants and maids, especially a maid of hers, named Leonella, to
whom she loved very much, for having grown up since they were children the two together in
Camila's parents' house, and when she married Anselmo the trujo
with him.
In the first three days, Lothario never said anything to him, even though he could,
when the tablecloths were lifted and people went to eat with a lot of
Hurry, because that's what Camila had told her to do. And Leonella still had an order
that he ate first than Camila, and that he never leave her side; more
she, who had thought about other things to her liking and had
need those hours and that place to occupy him in his content, no
He always fulfilled the commandment of his mistress; Before, I left them alone
as if they had commanded him. But the honest presence of Camila, the
gravity of his face, the composure of his person was so much, that he put
I curb the tongue of Lothario.
»But the benefit that Camila's many virtues made, putting
silence in the language of Lothario, it did more harm to both of them, because if
the tongue was silent, the thought ran and took place to contemplate,
part by part, we are all of goodness and beauty that Camila
had, enough to fall in love with a marble statue, not that a heart of
meat.
»Lotario looked at her in the place and space where she was to speak, and
she considered how worthy she was to be loved; and this consideration started little
little by little to assault the respects that Anselmo had, and a thousand times he wanted
leave the city and go where Anselmo never saw him, nor he
see Camila; but it was already hindering him and stopping the taste he found
in looking at her. He made himself strong and fought with himself to discard and not feel
the joy that made him look at Camila. Blame himself alone for his
folly, he was called a bad friend and even a bad Christian; made speeches and
comparisons between him and Anselmo, and they all stopped to say that there was more
been the madness and confidence of Anselmo that his little fidelity, and that if so
I had an excuse to God as well as to men for what I thought
to do, that he did not fear pity for his fault.
»Indeed, the beauty and goodness of Camila, together with the occasion
that the ignorant husband had placed in her hands, they found loyalty
of Lotario on land. And, without looking at anything other than what you like
inclined him, after three days of Anselmo's absence, in which
was in continuous battle to resist his wishes, began to challenge
Camila, with so much confusion and with such loving reasons that Camila was left
suspense, and did nothing but get up from where he was and enter
his room, without answering a word. But not because of this dryness
Hope fainted in Lothario, which is always born together with love;
before, he had more than Camila. Which, having seen in Lothario what
never think, did not know what to do. And, seeming to be neither a sure thing nor
well done to give him occasion or place to speak it again, he determined
to send that very night, as he did, to a servant of his with a ticket to
Anselmo, where he wrote these reasons:
Chapter XXXIV. Where the novel of the impertinent curious is continued
"As it is often said that the army looks bad without its general and the
castle without his Castilian, I say that the married woman seems very worse and
young woman without her husband, when very few occasions do not prevent it. I find myself
so bad without you, and so helpless of not being able to suffer this absence, that
If you don't come soon, I'll have to go entertain at my parents' house,
even if I leave yours unguarded; because the one you left me, if it is
He was left with such a title, I think he looks more for his taste than for what you
it touches you; and, well, you are discreet, I have nothing more to say to you, it is not even good
what else to tell you.
"This letter Anselmo received, and understood from it that Lothario had already
started the company, and that Camila must have responded like him
wished; and, exceedingly glad of such news, he replied to Camila,
word, that he did not move his house in any way, because he
I would return very soon. Camila was amazed at the answer of
Anselmo, who put her in more confusion than first, because she did not dare to
be at home, let alone go to their parents'; because in the meeting
his honesty was in danger, and on the way he went against the commandment of his
husband.
"Anyway, he resolved on what was worse, which was staying, with
determination not to flee the presence of Lothario, not to give something to
his servants; and she was already sorry for having written what she wrote to her husband,
afraid that he did not think that Lothario had seen in her some
ease that would have prompted him not to keep the decorum that he owed.
But, trusting in his goodness, she trusted God and his good thinking, that
thought to resist by keeping silent to everything that Lothair wanted to say to him, without
give more account to her husband, for not putting him in some quarrel and work. AND
He was still looking for a way to excuse Lotario with Anselmo, when he
he wondered the occasion that had prompted him to write that paper for her. With
these thoughts, more honest than correct or profitable, was another
day listening to Lothario, who carried his hand so that he began to
Camila's firmness wavered, and her honesty had a lot to do with
come to their eyes, lest they show any kind of loving compassion
that the tears and the reasons of Lotario in his chest had awakened.
All this Lotario noticed, and everything turned him on.
Finally, it seemed to him that it was necessary, in the space and place that
Anselmo was absent, tightening the fence around that fortress. And so,
he attacked his presumption with the praises of his beauty, because there is no
thing that more quickly renders and paves the boxed-up towers of vanity
of the beautiful ones that the very vanity, put in the tongues of the
flattery. Indeed, he, with all diligence, mined the rock of his fortitude,
with such supplies that, although Camila was all bronze, she would come to the
ground. Lothario cried, begged, offered, flattered, persisted, and pretended with so many
feelings, with samples of so many truths, that he gave through with the modesty
of Camila and came to triumph of what was least thought and most desired.
»Camila gave up, Camila gave up; but how much, if the friendship of
Lotario was not left standing? Clear example that shows us that only the
loving passion with huilla, and that no one has to put themselves in arms with such
powerful enemy, because divine forces are needed to overcome theirs
human. Leonela only knew of her mistress's weakness, because she did not
they were able to cover up the two bad friends and new lovers. Lotario did not want
tell Camila Anselmo's claim, nor that he had given her room to
get to that point, because I did not mind his love and thought that this way,
Perhaps and without thinking, and not on purpose, he had requested it.
Anselmo returned home a few days later, and did not see what
she was lacking in her, which was what she held the least and most esteemed. Left later
to see Lothario, and found him in his house; the two hugged, and the one
he asked for the news of his life or his death.
»-The news that I will be able to give you, oh friend Anselmo! said Lothario, they are from
that you have a woman who can worthily be an example and crown of all
good women. The words I have said to you have been blown away,
Offerings have been taken in little, gifts have not been accepted,
some feigned tears of mine has been made notable mockery. In resolution,
Just as Camila is a figure of all beauty, it is the archive where the
honesty and live restraint and modesty, and all the virtues that
they can make an honest woman praiseworthy and well-fortunate. Take again
your money, friend, I have them here, without having had to touch
to them; that Camila's integrity does not surrender to things as low as they are
gifts or promises. Be content, Anselmo, and do not want to do more tests of
those made; and, because on lean foot you have crossed the sea of ​​difficulties and
suspicions that women usually and can be had, do not want to enter
new in the deep sea of ​​new inconveniences, do not want to do
experience with another pilot of the goodness and strength of the ship that heaven
gave you luck so that you could pass the sea of ​​this world, if not, do account
that you are already in a safe harbor, and hold on with the anchors of good
consideration, and let yourself be until they come to ask you for the debt that
there is human nobility that will be excused from paying it.
»Anselmo was content with Lothario's reasons, and so he believed them
as if they were spoken by some oracle. But, with all that, he begged him not to
leave the company, even if it was not more than curiosity and entertainment,
although he did not take advantage of such diligent errands as
until then; and that he just wanted me to write him some verses in his
praise, under the name of Clori, because he would imply
Camila who was in love with a lady, whom he had put that
name for being able to celebrate it with the decorum that was due to his honesty;
and that, when Lothario did not want to take the trouble to write the verses, that
he would do them.
"" That will not be necessary, "said Lothario," since the
muses that some times of the year do not visit me. Tell Camila what you have
said of the pretense of my loves, that the verses I will do; yes not so
good as the subject deserves, they will be, at least, the best than me
could.
»The impertinent and the traitorous friend remained of this agreement; and, back
Anselmo to his house, he asked Camila what she was already marveling at.
I would have asked him: what was it that I told him the occasion why he had
written the paper you sent him. Camila replied that she had thought
that Lothario looked at her a little more easily than when he was in
home; but that I was already disappointed and believed that it had been imagination
hers, because Lotario was already fleeing from vella and from being with her alone. Told him
Anselmo that she could well be sure of that suspicion, because he knew
that Lothario was in love with a principal maiden of the city,
who he celebrated under the name of Clori, and that, although he did not
was there, there was no need to fear the truth about Lothario and the great friendship
of both. And, unless Camila de Lotario was notified that they were fake
those loves of Clori, and that he had told Anselmo by proxy
spend some time in the same praises of Camila, she, without a doubt,
fall into the desperate net of jealousy; more, for being already warned,
he passed that start without regret.
»Another day, when the three of them were on the table, Anselmo begged Lotario to say
something of which he had composed his beloved Clori; what then Camila
he did not know her, surely he could say what he wanted.
"" Even if I knew her, "replied Lothario," I didn't cover up anything, because
when some lover praises his lady as beautiful and the note as cruel, no
opprobrious he does to his good credit. But whatever it is, what I can say
that yesterday I made a sonnet to the ingratitude of this Clori, who says there:
Sonnet
In the silence of the night, when
the sweet sleep occupies mortals,
the poor account of my rich ills
I am to heaven and to my Clori giving.
And, at the time when the sun is showing
through the rosy eastern gates,
with sighs and uneven accents,
I am going to renew the old complaint.
And when the sun, from its starry seat,
lightning rights to the earth send,
the crying grows and I double the moans.
The night returns, and I return to the sad story,
and I always find, in my mortal persistence,
to heaven, deaf; to Chlori, without ears.
The sonnet seemed good to Camila, but better to Anselmo, for he praised him, and
said that the lady was too cruel
corresponded. To which Camila said:
»-So, is everything that poets in love say true?
"" As poets, they do not say it, "replied Lothario; more, as
lovers, they are always as short as true.
"" There is no doubt I do, "replied Anselmo, all to support and accredit the
Lotario's thoughts with Camila, so careless of Anselmo's artifice
as already in love with Lotario.
And so, with the taste that he had for his things, and more, taking for granted
that his wishes and writings to her were directed, and that she was the
true Clori, begged him that if another sonnet or other verses knew, the
say:
"" Yes, I know, "replied Lothario," but I don't think it's as good as the first one,
or, to put it better, less bad. And you may well judge it, because it is this:
Sonnet
I know that I die; and if I am not believed,
dying is more true, as it is more true
see me at your feet, oh beautiful ungrateful! dead,
rather than worshiping you repentant.
I will be able to see myself in the region of oblivion,
of life and glory and desert favor,
and there you can see yourself in my open chest
how your beautiful face is sculpted.
That this relic I keep for the hard
trance that threatens my stubbornness,
that in your very rigor is strengthened.
Woe to him who sails, the dark sky,
by sea unused and dangerous via,
where north or port is not offered!
Anselmo also praised this second sonnet, as he had done the first, and
In this way he was adding link by link to the chain with which he
bound and hindered his dishonor, because when Lothair most dishonored him,
then he would tell him that he was more honored; and, with this, all the steps
that Camila was descending towards the center of her contempt, she was raising them, in the
opinion of her husband, towards the summit of virtue and his good reputation.
»It happened in this that, finding herself once, among others, Camila alone with her
maiden, said:
"-I am running, Leonela friend, to see how little I have known how to esteem myself,
Well, I didn't even make Lotario buy the entire possession over time
that I gave him so quickly of my will. I fear that he must estimate my readiness or
lightness, without noticing the strength that he made me not to be able to
resist him.
"" Don't be sorry for that, my lady, "replied Leonela," because the mounts are not there,
nor is it a cause to diminish the estimate, to give oneself what is given, if, in
Indeed, what is given is good, and this in itself worthy of esteem. And even
It is often said that he who gives afterwards gives twice.
"" It is also often said, "said Camila," that what costs little is estimated at
less.
"" That is not the reason for you, "replied Leonela," because love, according to
Heard say, sometimes he flies and sometimes he walks, with this one he runs and with that one he goes
slowly, some it warms and others it burns, some it wounds and others it kills, in
at the same point the race of their desires begins and at that same point the
ends and ends, in the morning he usually encircles a fortress and the
night he has it exhausted, because there is no force that resists him. And, being so,
What are you afraid of, or what are you afraid of, if the same must have happened to
Lothario, having taken love as an instrument of surrendering our absence
of my lord? And it was necessary for her to conclude what love had
determined, without allowing time for Anselmo to have
to return, and with his presence the work would be imperfect. Because love doesn't
has another better minister to execute what you want the occasion to be: of
the occasion is served in all its deeds, mainly in the principles.
All this I know very well, more from experience than hearsay, and one day you will
I will say it, madam, that I too am of flesh and blood, a girl. How much more,
Mrs. Camila, that you did not give yourself or give so soon, that first you did not
you would have seen in the eyes, in the sighs, in the reasons and in the
promises and gifts of Lothario all his soul, seeing in it and in his
virtues how worthy was Lothario to be loved. Well, if this is so, don't you
those scrupulous and finicky thoughts assail the imagination, but
make sure that Lothario esteems you as you esteem him, and lives with
content and satisfaction that, since you fell into the love bond, it is the one that
it presses you with courage and esteem. And that not only has the four S's that
they say that good lovers must have, if not a whole ABC: yes
no, listen to me and you will see how I tell you in chorus. He is, as I see myself
It seems to me, grateful, good, gentleman, generous, in love, firm,
gallant, honored, illustrious, loyal, handsome, noble, first, principal,
quantioso, rich, and the eses they say; and then, unspoken, true. The X does not
it suits him, because it is rough handwriting; the Y is already said; the Z, zelador of your
honor.
Camila laughed at her maid's ABC, and took her for more talk on things
of love that she said; and so she confessed, discovering Camila as
she was dealing with love affairs with a well-born young man from the same city; which
Camila was troubled, fearing that it was that way where her honor could
take a risk. He rushed her if they passed their talks to more than being. She with
little shame and a lot of ease, he replied that they did; because it is
It is already certain that the carelessness of the ladies removes the shame from the
maids, who, when they see mistresses stumble, are not given
nothing to them to limp, or to let them know.
»Camila could do nothing else but beg Leonela not to say anything about her
done to him who claimed to be his lover, and who treated his things with secrecy,
because they did not come to the news of Anselmo nor of Lotario. Leonela replied
that he would do so, but he fulfilled it in a way that made the fear of
Camila that for her he had to lose his credit. Because the dishonest and
daring Leonella, after she saw that her mistress's behavior was not what
used to, dared to enter and put her lover inside the house, confident that,
even if his mistress saw him, he would not dare to discover him; that this damage
carry, among others, the sins of the ladies: that they become slaves of
their own servants and are forced to cover up their dishonesty and
vileities, as happened with Camila; that, although he saw one and many times that
his Leonela was with his beau in a room of his house, not only did he not
dared to quarrel, but gave him room to lock him up, and took away all
hindrances, so that she was not seen from her husband.
»But he could not remove them that Lotario did not see him leave once, when he broke
of the dawn; who, without knowing who he was, first thought that it must be
some ghost; more, when he saw him walk, muffle and cover himself with
care and modesty, he fell from his simple thought and gave into another, which was the
everyone's downfall if Camila didn't remedy it. Lotario thought that
The man who had seen Anselmo's house leave so untimely had not
entered into it by Leonella, he did not even remember if Leonella was in the world;
he only believed that Camila, in the same way that she had been easy and light with
he, it was for another; that these additions bring with them the evil of the
bad woman: who loses the credit of her honor with the same
surrendered begged and persuaded, and believes that it is more easily given to
others, and gives infallible credit to anyone who suspects that this comes to him. AND
It seems only that at this point Lothario lacked all his good
understanding, and all his warned speeches slipped from his memory,
Well, without doing anything that was good, not even reasonable, without more or more,
before Anselmo got up, impatient and blind with the jealous rage that
gnawed her insides, dying to get revenge on Camila, who in no way
had offended him, he went to Anselmo and said:
»-Know, Anselmo, that I have been fighting with myself for many days,
forcing me not to tell you what is no longer possible or fair that more
cover up. Know that Camila's strength is already surrendered and subject to everything
what I want to do of it; and if I have been slow to discover this
True, it was to see if it was some slight whim of his, or if he did it for
try me and see if the loves that, with your
license, with it I have started. I believed, anxiously, that she, if she were the one
I should and the one that we both thought, I would have already noticed me
request, but, having seen that it takes, I know that they are true
the promises that he has given me that, when you again make absence of your
home, he will talk to me in the bedroom, where the spare part of your jewelry is -and
It was the truth, that there Camila used to speak to him-; and I don't want that
hurriedly run to do some revenge, because it is not yet committed
sin but with thought, and it could be that, from this to the
time to put it to work, Camila's moved and the
repentance. And so, since, in whole or in part, you have always followed my
advice, follow and save one that I will tell you now, so that without deception and with
fearful warning you are satisfied with what you see the most
convenient. Pretend that you are absent for two or three days, like other times
you usually, and do so that you stay hidden in your bedroom, because the
tapestries that are there and other things with which you can cover yourself they offer you
much comfort, and then you will see through your own eyes, and I through mine,
what Camila wants; And if it were the evil that can be feared before
wait, with silence, sagacity and discretion you can be the executioner of your
grievance.
"Absorbed, suspended and admired, Anselmo was left with Lotario's reasons,
because they caught him in time where he least expected to hear them, because he already had
to Camila as the victor of Lotario's feigned assaults and began to
enjoy the glory of expiration. Callando was for a good space,
looking at the ground without moving an eyelash, and finally said:
»-You have done it, Lotario, as I expected from your friendship; in everything I have to
follow your advice: do what you want and keep that secret that you see that
it agrees in case so not thought.
"Lothario promised him, and, in turning away from him, he totally repented of
how much he had told him, seeing how foolishly he had walked, may he
take revenge on Camila, and not by way so cruel and so disgraced. Cursed his
understanding, it disfigured his slight determination, and he did not know what means to take
to undo what has been done, or to give some reasonable exit. Finally,
she agreed to give an account of everything to Camila; and, as there was no lack of room for
to be able to do so, that same day he found her alone, and she, just as she saw that
he could speak, he told her.
»-Know, friend Lotario, that I have a pain in my heart that squeezes me
so it seems that it wants to burst in the chest, and it must be wonderful
If he does not, then Leonela's shamelessness has reached so much that each
night he locks up a gallant of his in this house and stays with him until the day,
so at the expense of my credit how much will be left open field to judge him
to see him leave my house at such unusual hours. And what tires me is
that I cannot punish or scold her: that her being the secretary of our
deals has put a brake in my mouth to silence his, and I fear that
from here some bad event must be born.
»At the beginning that Camila said this, Lotario believed that it was an artifice to
disprove that the man he had seen leaving was Leonella's, and not hers;
but, seeing her cry and grieve, and ask her for a remedy, he came to believe the
true, and in believing it, he ended up being confused and completely sorry.
But, with all this, he told Camila not to be sorry, that he
He would order a remedy to stop Leonela's insolence. He also told him
who, instigated by the furious rage of jealousy, had told Anselmo, and
how he was arranged to hide in the bedroom, to see from there to
the clear the little loyalty that she kept to him. He asked forgiveness for this madness,
and advice to be able to remedy it and get out of such a troubled maze as
his bad speech had put him.
»Camila was shocked to hear what Lotario was saying to her, and with great anger and
many and discreet reasons scolded him and disfigured his bad thinking and the simple and
bad determination he had had. But, as naturally has the woman
ingenuity ready for good and for evil more than man, since he
is lacking when he purposely begins to make speeches, then at
Instantly Camila found the way to remedy so apparently inremediable
business, and told Lotario to see that another day Anselmo hid
where it said, because she intended to take out of her hiding comfort to
that from then on the two of them enjoyed each other without any fright; and without
fully declare his thought to him, he warned him to be careful that, in
Anselmo being in hiding, he would come when Leonela called him, and
as much as she told him, he would respond as he would respond even if he did not know what
Anselmo listened to him. Lothario insisted that he just declared his
intention, because with more security and warning he kept everything he saw to be
necessary.
"" I say, "said Camila," that there is nothing more to keep, if it were not to answer me.
as I will ask you (Camila not wanting to give him an account of what
thought to do, fearful that he would not want to follow the appearance that she so
it seemed good to him, and he followed or looked for others that could not be so
good ones).
With this, Lothario left; and Anselmo, another day, with the excuse of going that
village of his friend, he split up and went into hiding again: that he could do it with
comfort, because Camila and Leonela gave it to them for industry.
Hidden, then, Anselmo, with that startle that one can imagine
would have the one who hoped to see by his eyes make notomy of the entrails of
his honor, he was on the verge of losing the great good that he thought he had in
his dear Camila. Already certain and certain Camila and Leonela that Anselmo was
hidden, they entered the bedroom; and had barely set foot in it
Camilia, when, with a great sigh, she said:
»-Oh, Leonela friend! Wouldn't it be better if, before
execution what I do not want you to know, why do not try to hinder it, that
take Anselmo's dagger, which I have asked of you, and pass with it this
infamous chest of mine? But do not do such, that it will not be a reason that I bear the penalty
of someone else's fault. First I want to know what the
daring and dishonest eyes of Lothario that was cause to give him
daring to reveal to me a desire as bad as the one that has
discovered, in contempt of his friend and in my disgrace. Come on, Leonela,
that window and call him, that, without a doubt, he must be on the street,
Hoping to put into effect his evil intention. But first the cruel
how honored mine
»-Oh, my lady! answered the shrewd and warned Leonella, and what is
what do you want to do with this dagger? Do you want to kill yourself or
take it away from Lotario? That anyone of these things you want has to
result in loss of your credit and fame. It is better that you hide
offense, and do not allow this bad man to enter this house now and
find us alone. Look, lady, we are skinny women, and he is a man and
determined; and, as it comes with that evil purpose, blind and passionate,
maybe before you put yours into execution, he will do what you would
more bad than taking your life. Woe to my lord Anselmo, how badly has he
wanted to give this skinner in your home! And now, lady, that you kill him,
as I think you want to do, what are we to do after
dead?
"-What friend? -Camila answered-: we will leave him so that Anselmo
bury, because it will be fair that I rest the work that I will take on
to put his own infamy under the ground. Call him, finish, that all the
time it takes me to take due revenge for my wrongdoing it seems that
I offend the loyalty that I owe to my husband.
Anselmo listened to all this, and with every word that Camila said, he was
thoughts changed; But when she understood that she was determined to kill
to Lotario, he wanted to go out and discover himself, because such a thing should not be done; but
stop him from wanting to see where so much gallantry and honesty stood
resolution, with the purpose of getting out in time to get in the way.
Camila took a severe faint on this, and, throwing herself on top of a
In the bed that was there, Leonela began to cry very bitterly and to say:
»-Oh, unfortunate me if it were so unfortunate that I died here
in my arms the flower of the world's honesty, the crown of
good women, the example of chastity ...!
»With other things similar to these, that no one would listen to her who did not
had for the most hurt and loyal maiden in the world, and his mistress for
another new and persecuted Penelope. It did not take long for him to return from his faint
Camila; and, coming to his senses, he said:
"-Why don't you go, Leonela, to call the most loyal friend of friend who saw the
sun or covered the night? Finish, run, spike, walk, don't stray with the
delay the fire of anger that I have, and go over in threats and
curses the just revenge I expect.
"" I'm going to call you, my lady, "said Leonela," but you have me give it first
that dagger, because you do not do anything, as long as I am lacking, that you leave with it that
cry all your life to all those who love you well.
"-Go sure, Leonela friend, I won't do it," Camila replied; because, since
be bold and simple in your opinion to return for my honor, I do not have to be
as much as that Lucrecia who they say was killed without having committed
no mistake, and without having first killed whoever had the cause of his
misfortune. I will die, if I die, but it must be avenged and satisfied from the one who
It has given me the opportunity to come to this place to mourn his audacity,
Born so through no fault of mine
»Much was made to beg Leonela before she went out to call Lothario, but,
anyway, it came out; And, while he returned, Camilia was saying, as if
she talked to herself:
»-God help me! Wouldn't it be more accurate to have fired Lothario, as
I have done it many times other than not to put him in condition, as I have already
since, that he considers me dishonest and bad, even this time that I have to
take time to disappoint you? Better off, without a doubt; but I will not be avenged,
nor the honor of my husband satisfied, if so hand-washed and so step-wise
flat to come out of where his bad thoughts entered him.
May the traitor pay with his life for what he tried with such lascivious desire: know the
world, if I ever find out, that Camila not only kept loyalty
her husband, but gave him revenge on the one who dared to offend him. More,
However, I think it would be better to give an account of this to Anselmo, but I already know it.
I aimed to give in the letter I wrote to the village, and I think that not going
he to remedy the damage that I pointed out there, it must have been that, purely good
and confident, he did not want or could believe that in the chest of his so firm friend
there could be a kind of thought that was against his honor; not even I
I believed later, for many days, nor would I ever believe it, if his insolence did not
would go so far that the manifest gifts and long promises and
continuous tears will not show it to me. But what am I doing now
these speeches? Does a gallant result have, by any chance, a need for
any advice? No, by the way. Out, then, traitors; here, revenge!
Enter the false, come, arrive, die and finish, and whatever happens happens!
Clean I entered the power of the one that heaven gave me for mine, clean I have to leave
of the; and, at the most, I will come out bathed in my chaste blood, and in the impure
most false friend who saw friendship in the world.
And, saying this, he would walk about the room with his dagger drawn, giving
so bewildered and wild steps, and making such gestures, that
It seemed but that she lacked judgment, and that she was not a delicate woman, but a
desperate ruffian.
Anselmo was looking at everything, covered behind some tapestries where he had
hidden, and he admired everything, and it already seemed to him that what he had seen and
hearing was quite satisfactory for greater suspicions; and I already wish that the
proof of coming Lothario will be missing, fearful of some sudden bad event. AND,
being already to manifest and go out, to embrace and disabuse his
wife, she stopped because she saw that Leonella was returning with Lotario by the hand; and,
just as Camila saw him, making a large line on the ground with the dagger
in front of her, he said:
»-Lotario, take note of what I am saying: if you dare to pass this
line that you see, not even reach it, at the point that you see that you try,
in that same I will pass my chest with this dagger that I have in my hands. AND,
Before you answer this word, I want some others to
listen; that later you will answer what you like the most. The first,
I want, Lotario, you to tell me if you know Anselmo, my husband, and in what
opinion you have; and the second, I also want to know if you know me.
Answer me this, and do not be disturbed, or think too much what you have to
answer, as I am not asking you difficulties.
»Lotario was not so ignorant that, from the first point that Camila told him
to hide Anselmo, he would not have realized what she
thought to do; and thus, he reciprocated his intention so discreetly, and
so in time, that they both made that lie pass for more than true
truth; And thus, she responded to Camila in this way:
»-I didn't think, beautiful Camila, that you were calling me to ask me such things
out of the intention with which I come here. If you do it to delay my
promised mercy, from farther away you could entertain her, because all the more
the desired good wears out when hope is closer to possessing it;
But, why don't you say that I don't answer your questions, I say that I know
your husband Anselmo, and we have known each other since our most tender years;
and I do not want to say what you know so well about our friendship, because I
to witness the injury that love makes me do to you, powerful apology
of greater errors. I know you and I have in the same possession that he
have; that, otherwise, for less garments than yours I would not have to go
against what I must to be who I am and against the holy laws of the
true friendship, now for as powerful an enemy as love for me
broken and raped.
"" If you confess that, "replied Camila," a mortal enemy of all that
he just deserves to be loved, with what face do you dare to appear to whom you know
which is the mirror where you look at the one in whom you should look, to
that you see with how little occasion you offend him? But I already fell, oh, unhappy
of me !, in the account of who has made you have so little with what to you
You owe yourself, it must have been some self-assurance of mine, that I don't want
call it dishonesty, since it will not have proceeded from deliberate
determination, but of some neglect of which women who think
who have no one to hide from often do inadvertently. But,
Tell me: when, oh traitor, did I answer your prayers with some word or
signal that could awaken in you some shadow of hope to fulfill your
infamous wishes? When were your loving words not undone and
reprimanded of mine with rigor and harshness? When your many
promises and greater gifts were of me believed, or admitted? But for
It seems to me that someone cannot persevere in the long-term love affair
time, if it is not supported by some hope, I want to attribute to myself the
fault of your impertinence, because, without a doubt, some negligence of mine has sustained
so long your care; and so, I want to punish myself and give me the pain that you
guilt deserves. And, because you saw that, being so inhuman with me, it was not
possible to stop being with you, I wanted to bring you to witness the sacrifice
that I intend to do to the offended honor of my so honored husband,
you with the greatest care that has been possible, and me also with the little
modesty that I have had to flee the occasion, if I gave you one, to favor and
canonize your bad intentions. Around to say that the suspicion that I have
that some carelessness of mine engendered in you such wild thoughts is the
that most tires me, and the one that I most want to punish with my own hands,
because, if another executioner punished me, perhaps my guilt would be more public; but,
before this does, I want to kill by dying, and take with me whoever finishes me
to satisfy the desire for revenge that I hope and have, seeing there,
wherever it may be, the penalty given by disinterested justice and not
doubles the one who has put me in such desperate terms.
And, saying these reasons, with incredible force and lightness he lashed out at
Lothair with the drawn dagger, with such signs of wanting to nail it
in the chest, that he was almost in doubt if those demonstrations were
true or false, because he was forced to use his industry and his
force to prevent Camila from giving him. Which so vividly pretended
that strange lie and ugliness that, by giving the color of truth, wanted her
tint with his own blood; because, seeing that there could be no Lothario, or
pretending he couldn't, he said:
»-Well, luck does not want to satisfy my just wish at all,
less, it will not be so powerful that, in part, I take away that it does not satisfy you.
And, making force to release the hand of the dagger, that Lotario had it
grasped, took it out, and, guiding its point where it could hurt
deeply, he entered it and hid it above the island on the side
left, next to the shoulder, and then dropped to the ground, like
passed out.
Leonella and Lotario were suspended and stunned by such an event, and still
doubted the truth of that fact, seeing Camila lying on the ground and
bathed in his blood. Lotario came very quickly, terrified and without
breath, to draw the dagger, and, seeing the small wound, came out of the fear that
until then he had, and again he was amazed at the sagacity, prudence and
much discretion from the beautiful Camila; and, for going with what he
played, began to make a long and sad lamentation over the body of
Camila, as if she were deceased, casting many curses on herself, not only
him, but the one who had been the cause of speaking put in that term. AND,
As he knew that his friend Anselmo was listening to him, he said things that the
hey, I felt much more sorry for him than for Camila, although she was
judge.
»Leonela took her in her arms and put her on the bed, pleading with Lothario
I went to look for someone to secretly cure Camila; I also asked him for advice
and what they would say to Anselmo about that wound of his mistress, if
perhaps she came before she was healthy. He replied that they say what
they wanted, that he was not there to give advice that was of benefit; only him
He said to try to take his blood, because he went where people did not
see. And, with signs of much pain and feeling, he left home; and,
when he saw himself alone and partly where no one saw him, he did not cease to
crosses, marveling at Camila's industry and her mannerisms so
Leonela's own. He considered how aware Anselmo must have become of
who had a second Portia for his wife, and wished to meet him so
celebrate both the lie and the most concealed truth that ever could
imagine.
"Leonela took, as has been said, the blood of her mistress, which was no more than
what was enough to prove his lie; and, washing with a little wine
wound, he tied it as best he could, saying such reasons, as long as
that cured her, that, although no others had preceded, they would suffice to make
believe Anselmo that he had in Camila a simulacrum of honesty.
»Other Camila's words joined Leonela's words, calling themselves a coward and
of little courage, since he had lacked the time that was most necessary
to have him, to take his own life, which he had so hated. I asked for advice
her maid if she would give, or not, all that event to her dear husband; which
told him not to tell him, because it would put him under obligation to take revenge on
Lothario, which could not be without much risk of yours, and that the good woman
she was obliged not to give her husband an opportunity to quarrel, but to take away
as many as possible.
»Camila replied that her opinion seemed very good to her and that she
would follow; but that in any case it was convenient to find what to say to Anselmo about the
cause of that wound, which he could not stop seeing; to which Leonela
He replied that she, even mocking, did not know how to lie.
"-Well, I, sister," replied Camila, "what do I have to know?
Will I dare to forge or sustain a lie, if my life depended on it? AND
If we do not have to know how to put this out, it would be better to tell him the truth
naked, that does not reach us in a liar account.
"-Don't be sorry, ma'am: from here until tomorrow," replied Leonela, "I'll think
What do we say, and maybe that, because the wound is where it is, you can
cover up without him seeing it, and heaven will be served to favor our
such righteous and honest thoughts. Calm down, my lady, and try
calm your alteration, because my lord does not find you startled, and the rest
leave it to me, and to that of God, who always goes to good wishes.
»Anselmo had been very attentive to listen and see the tragedy performed
of the death of his honor; which with such strange and effective affections the
represented by the characters della, who seemed to have been transformed
in the same truth of what they pretended. I wanted the night very much, and to have
place to leave his house, and go see his good friend Lotario,
congratulating him on the precious daisy he had found in the
disappointment at the goodness of his wife. They were both careful to give him
place and comfort to go out, and he, without pearl, went out and then went to
look for Lothario, who, once found, cannot be properly counted
hugs that he gave him, the things that he said about his happiness, the praises that
gave Camila. All of which Lothario listened to without being able to show any
joy, because it represented to his memory how deceived his
friend and how unjustly he wronged him. And, although Anselmo saw that
Lotario was not happy, he believed he was the cause for having left Camila hurt
and he was the cause; and so, among other reasons, he said no
I was sorry for Camila's event, because, without a doubt, the wound was light,
because they were in concert to cover it up from him; and that, according to this, no
there was nothing to fear, but that from then on he rejoiced and rejoiced with him,
because by his industry and means he saw himself raised to the highest happiness
that he was right to wish himself, and he wanted his entertainments not to be other
than in making verses in praise of Camila, that would make her eternal in the
memory of the centuries to come. Lotario praised her good determination and
He said that he, for his part, would help build such an illustrious edifice.
With this, Anselmo was left the most deliciously deceived man who could have
in the world: he himself led her home by the hand, believing that he was carrying the
instrument of his glory, all the bane of his fame. Receive him Camila
with an apparently crooked face, although with a smiling soul. This deception lasted
some days, until, after a few months, Fortune returned her wheel and
evil came out with so much artifice until there covered, already
Anselmo cost him his life his impertinent curiosity. "
Chapter XXXV. Where the novel of the impertinent curious man ends
Little else was left to read of the novel, when the caramanchón where
Don Quixote was resting, Sancho Panza came out all in an uproar, saying loudly:
Attend, gentlemen, promptly and succor my lord, who is wrapped in the most
fought and locked battle that my eyes have seen. Long live God, who has given
a stab at the giant enemy of Lady Princess Micomicona, who
He has chopped off the head, cut by cut, as if it were a turnip!
-What do you say, brother? -said the priest, stopping reading what of the novel
remained. Are you in you, Sancho? How the hell can that be what you say
the giant being two thousand leagues from here?
At this, they heard a great noise in the room, and that Don Quixote was saying to
voices:
-Tente, thief, scoundrel, mess, I have you here, and it will not be worth it
your scimitar!
And it seemed to be stabbing the walls. And Sancho said:
-They do not have to stop to listen, but enter to break up the fight, or
help my master; although it will no longer be necessary, because, without a doubt, the
giant is already dead, and giving an account to God of his past and bad life, that
I saw the blood run on the ground, and the head cut off and fell to one side,
which is as large as a large wine leather.
"Let them kill me," said the innkeeper at this time, "if Don Quixote, or Don Diablo,
has not stabbed any of the red wine leathers that his
bedside were full, and the spilled wine must be what you think
blood to this good man.
And with this he entered the room, and all after him, and found Don
Quixote in the strangest suit in the world: he was in a shirt, which was not
so accomplished that in front it just covered her thighs, and behind
he had six fewer fingers; the legs were very long and skinny, full of
hair and not at all clean; He had a red bonnet on his head,
greasy, which was from the innkeeper; on his left arm the
blanket on the bed, with whom Sancho had annoyance, and he knew well the
because; and on the right, the sword was unsheathed, with which it struck
stabs everywhere, saying words as if truly
was fighting with some giant. And it's the good thing that I didn't have the eyes
open, because he was sleeping and dreaming that he was in battle with the
giant; that the imagination of the adventure that he was going to
pass away, which made him dream that he had already reached the kingdom of Micomicon, and
that he was already in the fight with his enemy. And had given so many stabs
in the hides, believing that he gave them in the giant, that the whole room
it was full of wine; which, seen by the innkeeper, took so much anger that
he attacked Don Quixote, and a closed fist began to give him so many blows
that if Cardenio and the priest were not removed, he would end the war of the
giant; and, with all that, the poor gentleman did not wake up, until
the barber brought a large cauldron of cold water from the well and
the whole body at once, with which Don Quixote awoke; but not with so much
I agree to check out the way it was.
Dorotea, who saw how short and subtle he was dressed, did not want to enter
see the battle of your helper and your opponent.
Sancho was looking for the giant's head all over the ground, and, of course,
he found her, he said:
-I already know that everything in this house is enchantment; than the other time, in this
The same place where I am now, they gave me a lot of marks and blows,
without knowing who gave them to me, and I could never see anyone; and now it doesn't seem
around here this head that I saw cut by my very eyes, and the blood
it ran from the body as from a fountain.
-What blood or what source do you say, enemy of God and of his saints? -He said
innkeeper-. Don't you see, thief, that the blood and the fountain is nothing but
these leathers that are pierced here and the red wine that swims in this
room, that while swimming I see the soul in the hells of the one who pierced them?
"I don't know anything," answered Sancho; I only know that I will come to be so miserable
that, for not finding this head, my county has to be undone like salt
in water.
And Sancho was worse awake than his master sleeping: such were his
promises his master had made to him. The innkeeper was desperate to see the
the squire's phlegm and the lord's curse, and swore not to be
like last time, that they left without paying; and that now they had not
assert the privileges of his cavalry to stop paying the one and the
another, even up to the cost of the snacks to be eaten.
the broken leathers.
The priest had the hands of Don Quixote, who, believing that he had already
the adventure ended, and who was in front of the princess Micomicona,
knelt before the priest, saying:
- Well may your greatness, tall and famous lady, live, of today more,
Surely this evil-born creature can do him harm; and me too, from
Today more, I am removed from the word that I gave you, then, with the help of the stop
God and with the favor of the one for whom I live and breathe, I have so well
compliment.
-Didn't I say so? Said Sancho hearing this. Yes, I was not drunk:
See if my master has already put the giant in salt! Certain are the bulls:
my county is mold!
Who would not laugh at the nonsense of the two, master and groom? Everybody
they laughed but the innkeeper, who gave himself to Satan. But, well, they did so much
the barber, Cardenio and the priest who, with no little work, found gift
Quixote in bed, who fell asleep, with samples of great
tiredness. They let him sleep, and went to the sale portal to console
to Sancho Panza for not having found the giant's head; although more
they had to do to placate the innkeeper, who was desperate for the
sudden death of their hides. And the innkeeper said in a voice and shout:
-In a bad point and at a reduced hour this knight errant entered my house,
that my eyes had never seen him, how expensive it costs me. Last time
he left with the cost of one night, of dinner, bed, straw and barley, for him and
for his squire, and a nag and a donkey, saying he was a knight
adventurer (what a bad luck God give him and how many adventurers there are in
the world) and that for this he was not obliged to pay anything, that he was
written in the tariffs of the errant cavalry. And now for his
respect, this other sir came and took my tail, and gave it back to me with more than
two quarts of damage, all peeled, which cannot be used for what the
my husband wants. And, finally and to finish everything, break my leathers and
pour me my wine; let me see his blood spilled. Well, don't think about it;
that, by the bones of my father and by the century of my mother, if they have not
to pay one room over another, or I would not call myself what I am called or be
daughter of who I am!
These and other such reasons said the innkeeper with great anger, and helped her
your good maid Maritornes. The daughter was silent, and from time to time she
smiled. The priest calmed everything, promising to satisfy their loss as
as best he could, both of the leathers and of the wine, and mainly of the
impairment of the tail, of whom they made so much account. Dorotea consoled
Sancho Panza telling him that every and when it seems to have been true
that his master had beheaded the giant, he promised, seeing himself
peaceful in his kingdom, to give him the best county there was.
Sancho consoled himself with this, and assured the princess that he was certain
that he had seen the head of the giant, and that, by more details, he had a
beard that reached to his waist; and if it did not seem, it was because everything
what happened in that house was by way of enchantment, as he had
proved again that he had landed on it. Dorotea said she believed so, and
that he had no pity, that everything would be done well and it would happen to ask by mouth.
Everyone calmed down, the priest wanted to finish reading the novel, because he saw that
little was missing. Cardenio, Dorotea and all the others begged him to finish it.
He, who wanted to please everyone, and for whom he had to read it, continued
the story, which read like this:
«It happened, then, that, by the satisfaction that Anselmo had of the goodness of
Camila, lived a happy and neglected life, and Camila, from industry, did
bad face to Lotario, because Anselmo understood the reverse of the will that
I had it; and, for further confirmation of his fact, asked Lotario license to
not come to his house, as the sorrow that with his
sight Camila received; but the deceived Anselmo told him that in no way
such would do. And, in this way, in a thousand ways Anselmo was the maker of
his disgrace, believing it to be to his liking.
In this, the one that Leonela had to see herself qualified, not with her loves,
He reached so much that, without looking at anything else, he went after him at full speed,
trusting her mistress to conceal her, and even warn her in the way that with little
suspicion could put him into execution. Anyway, one night Anselmo felt footsteps
in Leonella's room, and, wanting to go in to see who was giving them, he felt
that the door was stopped, which made him more willing to open it; and
He did so much force that he opened it, and entered inside in time that he saw that a
man jumped out the window into the street; and, rushing to
reach him or meet him, he could not achieve either one or the other, because Leonela
hugged him, saying:
"" Be quiet, my lord, and do not be upset, nor follow the one who jumped from here;
It is my business, and so much, that he is my husband.
Anselmo did not want to believe it; before, blind with anger, he drew the dagger and wanted
hurt Leonela, telling her to tell him the truth, if not, he would kill her.
She, with fear, without knowing what was being said, said:
"-Don't kill me, sir, I'll tell you things of more importance than
You can imagine.
"" Tell them later, "said Anselmo; if not, you are dead.
"" For now it will be impossible, "said Leonella," as I am embarrassed; let me
Until tomorrow, then you will know about me what has to admire you; and is
I'm sure the one who jumped out of this window is a young man from this city,
has given the hand of being my husband.
Anselmo calmed down with this and wanted to wait for the term that was requested of him,
because I did not think to hear anything that was against Camila, for being of her kindness
so satisfied and confident; and thus, she left the room and left locked in
him to Leonela, telling her that he would not get out of there until he told her what
had to tell him.
»Then he went to see Camila and tell her, as he told her, everything that
her maid had passed her by, and the word she had given her to tell her
great things and of importance. If Camila was troubled or not, there is no reason
say it, because it was so much fear that he took on, truly believing -and
It was to be believed - that Leonela was to tell Anselmo everything she knew about her
little faith, who did not have the courage to wait if his suspicion turned out false or not. AND
That very night, when it seemed to him that Anselmo was sleeping, he put his
best jewels she had and some money, and, without being anyone's heartfelt,
left the house and went to Lotario's, to whom he told what was happening, and
asked me to collect it, or to leave the two of them where Anselmo
could be sure. The confusion in which Camila put Lotario was such,
that he did not know how to answer a word, nor did he know how to resolve
would do.
"Anyway, she agreed to take Camila to a monastery, in which she was a prioress.
his sister. Camila consented to this, and, with the alacrity that the case requested,
Lotario took her and left her in the monastery, and he, anxiously, left
then from the city, without informing anyone of his absence.
»When dawn came, without noticing Anselmo that Camila was missing from his side,
wanting to know what Leonella wanted to say to him, he got up and
It was where he had locked her up. He opened and entered the room, but not
found Leonella in it: he found only a few sheets added to the
window, sign and signal that there he had gotten off the hook and gone. Went back
then very sad to tell Camila, and, not finding her in bed or in
the whole house was astonished; he asked the house servants about her, but
no one knew how to give a reason for what he was asking for.
"Perhaps he was right, going to look for Camila, who saw their chests open and that
most of their jewels were missing, and with this he just realized
of his misfortune, and that Leonella was not the cause of his misfortune. And, there
As he was, without finishing dressing, sad and thoughtful, he went to realize
of his misery to his friend Lothario. But when he did not find him, and his servants
They told him that that night he had been absent from home and had taken with him
all the money he had, he thought to lose his mind. And, to finish
to conclude with everything, returning to his house, he did not find in it any of
how many servants or maids did he have, except the deserted and lonely house.
»He did not know what to think, what to say, or what to do, and little by little he was
returning the judgment. He looked at himself and looked at himself in an instant without a woman, without
friend and no servants; helpless, in his opinion, of the sky that covered him, and
especially without honor, because in Camila's fault he saw his downfall.
He finally resolved, after a great piece, to go to the village of his
friend, where had he been when he set up all that
misfortune. He closed the doors of his house, got on horseback, and with fainted
breath hit the road; and, he had barely walked half, when, harassed
from his thoughts, he was forced to get off and lease his horse to a
tree, to whose trunk he dropped, giving tender and painful sighs, and
there he stayed until almost nightfall; and that hour he saw a
man on horseback from the city, and, having greeted him, asked him
what news was in Florence. The citizen replied:
"-The strangest that many days have been heard in it; because it is said
publicly that Lotario, that great friend of Anselmo the rich, who lived
to San Juan, tonight he took Camila, Anselmo's wife, who neither
It seems. All this has been said by a maid of Camila, who last night found her
governor hanging down with a sheet through the windows of the house of
Anselmo. In fact, I do not know exactly how the business happened; I only know that
the whole city is amazed at this event, because such a
fact of the great and familiar friendship of the two, which they say was so much,
that the two friends called them.
"" Do you know, by any chance, "said Anselmo," the path that Lotario and
Camila?
"" I don't think so, "said the citizen," since the governor has used
much diligence in looking for them
"'To God you go, sir,' said Anselmo.
"" Stay with him, "replied the citizen, and let him go.
With such unfortunate news, he almost almost came to Anselmo's terms, not just
lose your mind, but end your life. He got up as best he could and came to
his friend's house, who still did not know his misfortune; more, how did you see him arrive
yellow, wasted and dry, he understood that he was tired from some serious evil.
Anselmo then asked them to put him to bed, and to give him writing preparation.
This was done, and they left him lying down and alone, because he wanted it that way, and even though
close the door. So seeing himself alone, he began to carry both the
imagination of his misadventure, which clearly knew that he was running out
life; and thus, he ordered to leave news of the cause of his strange death;
and, starting to write, before he finished putting everything he wanted, he
he gasped and left his life in the hands of the pain caused by his
cheeky curiosity.
Seeing the master of the house that it was already late and that Anselmo was not calling, he agreed
to enter to know if his indisposition was passing, and found him lying
face down, half of the body on the bed and the other half on the desk,
on which was with the paper written and open, and he still had the
pen in hand. The guest came to him, having called him first; and,
locking him by the hand, seeing that he did not respond to him and finding him cold, he saw
that he was dead. He was greatly admired and grieved, and called the people
from home so that they would see the misfortune to Anselmo happened; and finally,
read the paper, which he knew was written in his own hand, which
contained these reasons:
A foolish and impertinent desire took my life. If the news of my death
reach Camila's ears, know that I forgive her, because she was not
she forced to perform miracles, nor did I need to want her to
did them; and, since I was the maker of my disgrace, there is no
that...
"Anselmo wrote so far, where it was seen that at that point,
without being able to finish reason, his life ended. Another day his friend gave notice
to Anselmo's relatives of his death, who already knew his misfortune,
and the monastery where Camila was, almost at the end of accompanying her
husband on that forced trip, not for the news of the dead husband, but for
the ones he heard from the absent friend. It is said that, although she saw herself as a widow, she did not
leave the monastery, nor, less, make the profession of a nun, until, not
there for many days, news came to him that Lothario had died in a
battle that Monsiur de Lautrec gave to the Great Captain Gonzalo
Fernández de Córdoba in the kingdom of Naples, where the
late sorry friend; which Camila knew, made profession, and ended
in a few days life to the rigorous hands of sadness and melancholy.
This was the end they all had, born of such a foolish beginning. "
Well, said the priest, it seems to me this novel, but I cannot persuade myself that
this is true; and if it is feigned, the author pretended badly, because you cannot
imagine that there is a husband so foolish who wants to make such an expensive experience
like Anselmo. If this case were put between a gallant and a lady, it could
carry, but between husband and wife, something is impossible; and, in what
It is time to tell him, I am not dissatisfied.
Chapter XXXVI. Which is about the brave and gigantic battle that Don Quixote
had with some red wine leathers, with other rare events that in the sale
they happened to him
While at this, the innkeeper, who was at the door of the sale, said:
-This coming is a beautiful troop of guests: if they stop here,
gaudeamus we have.
-Which people is it? Cardenio said.
`` Four men, '' replied the innkeeper, `` come on horseback, to the genet, with
spears and shields, and all with black masks; and along with them comes a
woman dressed in white, in an armchair, anxiously covered her face, and
two other waiters on foot.
-Are they very close? asked the priest.
"So close," replied the innkeeper, "that they are coming."
Hearing this, Dorotea covered her face, and Cardenio entered the
Don Quixote's room; and there was hardly any place for this, when
All those that the innkeeper had said entered the sale; and, getting off the
four on horseback, who were of a very gentle size and disposition, went to
alight the woman who was on the couch; and, taking one of them in their
arms, he seated her in a chair that was at the entrance of the room where
Cardenio had hidden. In all this time, neither she nor they
they had removed the masks, nor had they spoken a word; only, at
sit the woman in the chair, gave a deep sigh and dropped the
arms, like a sick and passed out person. The pedestrians brought the
horses to the stable.
Seeing this, the priest, eager to know which people were those who, with such
suit and such silence was, he went where the waiters were, and one of the
He asked him what he already wanted; who replied:
"Goddamn it, sir, I can't tell you what people these are;" I only know that
shows to be very main, especially the one who came to take in his
arms to that lady you have seen; and this I say because all
others have respect for him, and nothing is done other than what he orders and
command.
-And the lady, who is she? asked the priest.
`` I won't know how to say that either, '' replied the waiter, `` because all the way there
I have seen her face; sigh yes I have heard it many times, and give a few
moans that it seems that with each one of them wants to give the soul. And it is not from
wonder that we do not know more than what we have said, because my partner
and I haven't been with them for more than two days; because, having them
encountered on the way, they begged and persuaded us to come with
them to Andalusia, offering to pay us very well.
-And have you heard of any of them? asked the priest.
"No, by the way," replied the waiter, "because everyone walks with so much
silence which is marvelous, because nothing is heard between them but the
sighs and sobs from the poor lady, which move us to pity; and without
We doubtless believe that she is forced wherever she goes, and, according to
can deduce from her habit, she is a nun, or she will be, which is the most
true, and perhaps because the monk should not be born of will, it goes
sad, as it seems.
"It could all be," said the priest.
And, leaving them, he returned to Dorothea, who, as he had heard
sighing at the cloaked woman, moved by natural compassion, she reached out and
said:
-How bad do you feel, my lady? See if it is one of whom women
usually have use and experience of curing him, that for my part I offer you a
willingness to serve you.
The wounded lady was silent about all this; and, although Dorotea returned with
greater offers, it was still in his silence, until the
cloaked gentleman who said the waiter that the others obeyed, and said to
Dorotea:
-Don't get tired, madam, in offering anything to that woman, because
habit of not thanking things that are done for her, nor do you
answer, if you don't want to hear a lie from his mouth.
"I never said it," said the one who had been keeping quiet until then;
Before, for being so true and so without lying traces, I see myself now in
so much misfortune; and I want you to be the witness yourself, because my
pure truth makes you false and liar.
Cardenio heard these reasons very clearly and distinctly, as one who was
so close to whoever said them that only the door of Don Quixote's room
was in the middle; And, just as he heard them, giving a great voice he said:
-Oh my GOD! What's this that I'm are hearing? What voice is this that has come to
my ears?
The woman turned her head to these cries, all startled, and, no
Seeing who was giving them, he got up and went to enter the room;
which, seen by the knight, stopped her, not letting her move a step. TO
She, with confusion and restlessness, fell off the taffeta with which she was wearing
covered his face, and discovered an incomparable beauty and a face
miraculous, though discolored and amazed, because with his eyes he walked
surrounding all the places where he could see, with so much zeal,
that seemed like a person out of judgment; whose signals, without knowing why
did, they put great pity on Dorotea and on all who looked at her. Had it
knight tightly held by the back, and, being so busy in
having it, he could not go to raise his hood, which fell off, as, in
effect, it fell off completely; and, looking up Dorotea, who embraced with
The lady was there, she saw that the one who was hugging her anxiously was her husband
Mr.Fernando; and, he had scarcely known him, when, throwing from the intimacy of
his entrails a long and very sad `` oh! '', he fell on his back
passed out; and, unless the barber was there, who picked her up from the
arms, she found herself on the ground.
Then the priest came to take off the hood, to pour water on his face,
And just as she discovered it, Don Fernando, who was the one who was
embraced with the other, and was as dead to see her; but not because he stopped,
with all this, to have Luscinda, who was the one trying to get loose from
your arms; who had met Cardenio in her sigh, and he had
known to her. Cardenio also heard the ay! that Dorotea gave when
fell in a faint, and, believing it to be his Luscinda, left the room
terrified, and the first thing he saw was Don Fernando, who was holding
Luscinda. Don Fernando also later met Cardenio; and all three,
Luscinda, Cardenio, and Dorotea, were left speechless and suspended, almost without knowing what
that had happened to them.
They were all silent and all looked at each other: Dorotea at Don Fernando, Don Fernando at
Cardenio, Cardenio to Luscinda and Luscinda to Cardenio. More who first
The silence was broken, it was Luscinda, speaking to Don Fernando in this way:
-Leave me, Mr. Don Fernando, for what you must be who you are, since
for another respect do not do it; let me get to the wall of who I am
ivy, to the support of those who have not been able to separate me from your
importunations, your threats, your promises or your gifts.
Notice how the sky, through unusual ways and to us covered up, has
put my real husband in front. And you know well for a thousand expensive
experiences that death alone was enough to erase him from my memory.
Let them be part of such clear disappointments so that you return, since you cannot
do something else, love in rage, will in spite, and finish me off
he life; that, as I render it in front of my good husband, I will give it for
well used: perhaps with my death he will be satisfied with the faith that
I held until the last trance of life.
In the meantime Dorothea had come to herself, and had been listening
all the reasons that Luscinda said, for which she came to the knowledge of
who she was; that, seeing that Don Fernando still had not left her from the
arms, nor did he respond to his reasons, trying his best, he
He got up and went to kneel at her feet; and, spilling a lot
amount of beautiful and pitiful tears, that's how he began to say:
-If it is no longer, my lord, that the rays of this sun that in your arms
eclipsed you have they take away and obscure those of your eyes, you will have already
see that the one who kneels at your feet is the one without luck, until you
you want, and the unfortunate Dorotea. I am that humble farmer to whom
you, by your goodness or by your pleasure, wanted to raise the highness of power
be called yours. I am the one who, locked in the limits of honesty, lived
happy life until, at the voices of your importunities, and, apparently,
just and loving feelings, he opened the doors of his modesty and gave you
the keys to his freedom: a gift from you so ungrateful, which shows it
It was very clear that it had been forced to meet me in the place where you find me, and to see you
I to you the way I see you. But, with all this, I wouldn't want it to fall
in your imagination to think that I have come here with steps of my disgrace,
having brought me only the pain and feeling of seeing myself forgotten about you.
You wanted me to be yours, and you wanted it so that, although now
you want it not to be, it will not be possible for you to stop being mine. Look sir
mine, which can be a reward for the beauty and nobility for whom you leave me
the incomparable will that I have for you. You can't be the beautiful one
Luscinda, because you are mine, nor can she be yours, because she is Cardenio's; and
the easier it will be, if you look at it, reduce your will to love who
adores you, not to direct the one who hates you to love you well. You
You requested my carelessness, you begged my integrity, you did not ignore my
quality, you know well the way I gave myself to all your will: no
you have no place or welcome to call you to deceit. And if this is so, how
It is, and you are as Christian as a gentleman, why so many detours
long to make me happy in the ends, as you made me in the
beginning? And if you do not love me for who I am, that I am your true and
legitimate wife, love me, at least, and admit me for your slave; what, how
I am in your power, I will consider myself happy and very lucky. Do not let,
with leaving me and forsaking me, let them become and gather huddles in my disgrace;
do not give my parents such a bad old age, because the loyal services do not deserve it
that, as good vassals, they have always made yours. And if you think
that you have to annihilate your blood by mixing it with mine, consider that
there are few or no nobility in the world who have not run through this
path, and that what is taken from women is not the one that makes the case in
the illustrious decendants; how much more, that true nobility consists of
virtue, and if you lack it, denying me what
you must, I will be left with more noble advantages than you have. Anyway,
Sir, what I tell you lately is that, whether you want it or not, I am you
wife: witnesses are your words, which have not and should not be liars, yes
It is already that you pride yourself on what you despise me for; witness will be the
signature that you made, and witness to heaven, whom you called for witness of
what you promised me And, when all this is missing, your very conscience has not
of failing to give voices shutting up in the middle of your joys, returning for
this truth that I have told you and disturbing your best tastes and content.
These and other reasons said the injured Dorotea, with so much feeling and
tears, that the same ones that accompanied Don Fernando, and how many
They were present, they accompanied her in them. Don Fernando heard it without
I replied a word to her, until she ended hers and began so many
sobs and sighs, that it must have been a heart of bronze that with
samples of so much pain did not soften. Looking at her was Luscinda, no
less hurt by his feeling than admired by his great discretion and
loveliness; and, although he wanted to reach out to her and say a few words of
consolation, the arms of Don Fernando did not leave her, they held her tight.
Who, full of confusion and fright, after a good space that
He was looking at Dorotea attentively, opened his arms and, letting go
Luscinda said:
-You won, beautiful Dorotea, you won; because it is not possible to have the courage to
deny so many truths together.
With the faint that Luscinda had suffered, just as Don Fernando left her,
he was going to fall to the ground; but, Cardenio being there together, than at
Don Fernando's back had been put on because he did not know him,
Supposing all fear and venturing at all risk, he went to support
Luscinda, and, taking her in his arms, said:
-If the pious heaven likes it and wants you to already have some rest, loyal,
firm and beautiful my lady, nowhere do I believe that you will have more
I am sure that in these arms that now receive you, and another time you
they received, when fortune wanted that I could call you mine.
For these reasons, Luscinda set her eyes on Cardenio, and, having begun
to know him, first by voice, and making sure that he was by sight,
almost senseless and disregarding any honest respect, he threw
His arms around his neck, and, joining his face with Cardenio's, he said:
-You do, my lord, you are the true owner of your captive, although
the contrary fate prevents it, and, although more threats are made to this
life that is sustained by yours.
This was a strange spectacle for Don Fernando and for all the
bystanders, marveling at such an unseen event. It seemed to Dorotea that
Don Fernando had lost the color of his face and that he was making a gesture of wanting
take revenge on Cardenio, because he saw him direct his hand to put her in the
sword; And, just as he thought, with no sight, she embraced him for
his knees, kissing them and holding him tight, that he would not let him move,
and, without ceasing a point of her tears, she said:
-What are you planning to do, my only refuge, in this unthinkable
trance? You have your wife at your feet, and the one you want to be is
in the arms of her husband. See if it will be okay or possible for you
undo what heaven has done, or if it will suit you to want to raise
equal yourself to the one who, postponed all inconvenience, confirmed in his
truth and firmness, in front of your eyes he has his, bathed in liquor
loving the face and chest of her true husband. For whom God is you
I pray, and for who you are I beg you, that this notorious disappointment does not
only do not increase your anger, but decrease it in such a way, that with
stillness and tranquility allow these two lovers to have you, without
your impediment, all the time that heaven wishes to grant itself; and in
this will show the generosity of your illustrious and noble chest, and will see the world
that reason is stronger with you than appetite.
While this was Dorotea saying, although Cardenio had Luscinda in his arms,
He did not take his eyes off Don Fernando, determined that, if he saw him
make a move to their detriment, try to defend themselves and offend as
He could do better to all those who show themselves in his harm, even if he
cost your life. But at this time Don Fernando's friends came, and
the priest and the barber, who had been present at all, without missing
good old Sancho Panza, and everyone surrounded Don Fernando, begging him
it was for the good of looking at Dorotea's tears; and that, being true,
as no doubt they believed it to be, what in their reasons had said,
that she would not allow herself to be disappointed in her just hopes. That
consider that, not perhaps, as it seemed, but with particular providence
from heaven, they had all gathered in a place where no one thought least; and
to warn, "said the priest," that only death could remove Luscinda
of Cardenio; and, though the edges of some sword might divide them, they
their death would be very happy; and that in the inremediable ties it was
utmost sanity, forcing and defeating himself, showing a generous
chest, allowing the two of them to enjoy the good that the
Heaven had already granted them; to lay anxious eyes on the beauty
Dorotea, and she would see that few or none could match her, the more
give him an advantage, and join his beauty with his humility and the extreme of
love I had for him; and, above all, note that if he prided himself on
gentleman and Christian, who could not do otherwise than fulfill the
given word, and that, by fulfilling it, he would fulfill God and satisfy the
discreet people, who know and know that it is the prerogative of the
beauty, even if it is in a humble subject, as it is accompanied by
honesty, being able to stand up and equal himself to any highness, without
impairment of the one who raises it up and equals himself; and, when the
strong laws of taste, as sin does not intervene in it, it should not be
blamed the one who follows them.
In fact, to these reasons they added all others, such and so many, that the
brave chest of Don Fernando (in short, as fed with illustrious blood)
he softened and allowed himself to be overcome by the truth, which he could not deny even though
I'd like; and the signal that he gave of having surrendered and surrendered to the good looks
What had been proposed to him was to get down and hug Dorotea, saying:
-Get up, my lady, it is not fair that the
that I have in my soul; and if so far I have not given samples of what
I say, maybe it was by order of heaven, so that, seeing in you the faith
that you love me, I know how to estimate what you deserve. What I beg of you is
that you do not reprimand me for my bad term and my great carelessness, because the same
occasion and force that moved me to steal you for me, that same impelled me
to try not to be yours. And may this be true, come back and look at the
eyes of the already happy Luscinda, and in them you will find apology for all my
mistakes; and, since she found and achieved what she desired, and I have found in you
what fulfills me, may she live safe and happy long and happy years with her
Cardenio, I will beg heaven to let me live with my Dorotea.
And, saying this, he embraced her again and brought her face together with his, with
such a tender feeling that it was necessary for him to take great account that the
tears did not finish giving unquestionable signs of his love and
repentance. Those of Luscinda and Cardenio did not, and even the
of almost everyone who was present there, because they began to spill
so many, some of their own contentment and others of others, that it did not seem
but that some serious and bad case to all had happened. Until Sancho Panza
He was crying, although later he said that he was not crying except to see that Dorotea
was, as he thought, Queen Micomicona, from whom he so many mercies
I expected. It lasted some time, together with the crying, the admiration in all,
and then Cardenio and Luscinda went to kneel before Don
Fernando, thanking him for the mercy he had given them so courteously
reasons, that Don Fernando did not know what to answer them; and so he lifted them up and
He embraced with expressions of much love and great courtesy.
He then asked Dorotea to tell him how she had come to that place so
away from yours. She, with brief and discreet reasons, told everything that
He had previously told Cardenio, of which Don Fernando and the
who came with him, who wanted the story to last longer: so much was
the grace with which Dorotea recounted her misadventures. And, just as there was
finished, Don Fernando said what had happened to him in the city after
who found the paper in the bosom of Luscinda, where she declared to be the wife of
Cardenio and not being able to be hers. He said he wanted to kill her, and he would do it if he
his parents were not prevented; and that thus, he left his house, angry and
run, with determination to take revenge more comfortably; and what other day
learned how Luscinda had been absent from her parents' home, without anyone
could tell where he had gone, and that, in resolution, after a few
months he came to know how he was in a monastery, with the will to stay
in him his whole life, if he could not spend it with Cardenio; and that, as well as
knew, choosing for his company those three gentlemen, he came to the place
where he was, to which he had not wanted to speak, afraid that, knowing
that he was there, there had to be more guard in the monastery; and so,
Waiting one day for the goal to be open, he left the two at the
guard of the gate, and he, with another, had entered the monastery
looking for Luscinda, who they found in the cloister talking to a
nun; and, snatching her away, leaving no room for anything else, they had come with
her to a place where they accommodated what they needed to
bring her. All of which they had been able to do well to save him, for being the
monastery in the country, a long way out of town. He said that as well as
Luscinda found herself in his power, lost all senses; and what, after
returned to himself, he had done nothing but cry and sigh, without speaking
any word; and that thus, accompanied by silence and tears, they had
reached that sale, which for him was to have reached heaven, where he
they finish off and have an end all the misfortunes of the earth.
Chapter XXXVII. That the story of the famous Infanta Micomicona continues,
with other funny adventures
All this Sancho heard, not with little pain in his soul, seeing that he
the hopes of his loved one disappeared and went up in smoke, and that the beautiful
Princess Micomicona had turned into Dorothea, and the giant into gift
Fernando, and his master was falling asleep soundly, well neglected of
All that happened. Dorotea could not be sure if the good that
possessed. Cardenio was on the same thought, and Luscinda's was running
for the same account. Don Fernando thanked heaven for mercy
received and have led him out of that intricate labyrinth, where he was
so close to losing credit and soul; and, finally, how many in the
sale they were, they were happy and joyful of the good success that they had
had such deadlocked and desperate deals.
Everything was put in order by the priest, as discreet, and each one gave the
for the good achieved; but the one who retired the most and was content was the
innkeeper, for the promise that Cardenio and the priest had made to him as pagalle
all the damages and interests that on behalf of Don Quixote would have
I come. Only Sancho, as has already been said, was the afflicted, the unfortunate
and the sad; and thus, with a wicked countenance, he entered his master, who
he had just woken up, to whom he said:
"Well may your grace, Mr. Sad Figure, sleep as long as you
I want, without taking care to kill any giant, or to return to the princess
his kingdom: that everything is done and concluded.
`` I think so well, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because I have had with the giant
the most colossal and outrageous battle that I think to have in every day
of my life; and backhanded, wham! I knocked his head to the ground, and he was
so much blood came out, that the streams ran through the land as if
were of water.
-As if they were red wine, could your grace say better
answered Sancho, because I want your grace to know, if not
knows, that the dead giant is a pierced leather, and the blood, six arrobas
of red wine that she locked in her belly; and the severed head is the whore
who bore me, and take it all Satan.
-And what are you saying, crazy? replied Don Quixote. Are you in your brain?
`` Stand up, your grace, '' said Sancho, `` and you will see the good message that
done, and what we have to pay; and he will see the queen turned into a lady
particular, called Dorotea, with other events that, if she falls into them, have
Just smoke it.
Don Quixote replied, I would not be amazed at anything, because, although you
Do you remember, the other time we were here, I told you that everything here
happening were things of enchantment, and it would not be much that now
same.
`` I would believe everything, '' Sancho answered, `` if my maintenance were also
As desired, but it was not, but really and truly; and I saw that he
innkeeper who is here today had one end of the blanket, and pushed me
towards the sky with much grace and spirit, and with as much laughter as strength; and
where knowing people intervenes, I have for myself, although simple and
sinner, that there is no enchantment, but a lot of grinding and a lot of bad
fortune.
"Now, God will remedy it," said Don Quixote. Give me dress and let me
go out there, I want to see the events and transformations that you say.
Sancho gave him to dress, and while he was getting dressed, the priest told
Don Fernando and the others the follies of Don Quixote, and the artifice that
they had used to get him out of the Peña Pobre, where he imagined himself to be
disdain for his mistress. He also told them almost all the adventures that
Sancho had told, that not a little they admired and laughed, for seeming
what it seemed to all: to be the strangest genre of insanity that could fit
in wild thinking. The priest said more: that, well, the good success
Dorotea prevented passing with her dignity forward, which was
It is necessary to invent and find another one to be able to take him to his land. Offered
Cardenio to continue what he started, and that Luscinda would do and represent the
Dorotea person.
`` No, '' said Don Fernando, `` it must not be like that: I want Dorotea to
continue your invention; that, as it is not very far from here the place of this
good gentleman, I will be happy to see your remedy.
-He's not more than two days from here.
-Well, even if it was more, I would like to walk them, in exchange for doing
such a good deed.
At this, Don Quixote came out, armed with all his supplies, with the helmet,
although battered, Mambrino's head, embracing his rodela and
leaning against its trunk or sandeel. He suspended Don Fernando and the others
strange presence of Don Quixote, seeing his face half a league from
gait, dry and yellow, the unevenness of their arms and their measured
continent, and they were silent until they saw what he said, which, with
a lot of gravity and repose, fixing his eyes on the beautiful Dorotea, he said:
-I am informed, beautiful lady, since my squire that your greatness
has been annihilated, and your being has been undone, because of queen and great
lady you used to be you have become a particular maiden. Yes
This has been by order of your father's necromancer king, afraid that I
did not give you the necessary and due help, I say that he did not know or know about the
mean mass, and that he was little versed in chivalric stories,
because if he had read them and passed them so carefully and with so much space
as I passed and read them, I will find at every step how other lesser gentlemen
fame that mine had finished more difficult things, not being much
kill a giant, no matter how arrogant; because it has not been many hours that
I saw myself with him, and ... I want to shut up, because they don't tell me I'm lying; but
Time, discoverer of all things, will tell when we least think about it.
`` Dress yourself in two hides, not with a giant, '' said the
innkeeper.
To whom Don Fernando ordered to be silent and not interrupt the talk of Don
Quixote in no way; and Don Quixote continued saying:
-I say, in short, tall and disinherited lady, that if for the cause that I have said
your father has made this metamorphoses in your person, that does not
give any credit, because there is no danger on earth for those who do not
my sword opens its way, with which, putting the head of your
enemy on the ground, I will put the crown of yours on your head in
short days.
Don Quixote said no more, and waited for the princess to answer him,
which, as he already knew, Don Fernando's determination to continue
forward in the deception until he brought Don Quixote to his land, with much
grace and gravity, he replied:
Whoever told you, brave knight of the Sad Figure, that I
I had changed and changed my being, he did not tell you the truth, because the same
I went yesterday, I am today. It is true that some changes have made me certain
occurrences of good fortune, which have given me the best that I could
want me, but that is not why I have stopped being the one I used to be and having the
We have the same thoughts of availing myself of the value of your valiant and invenerable
arm that I've always had. So, my lord, your kindness return the
Honor the father who begot me, and make him a wise and prudent man,
because with his science he found a way so easy and so true to remedy my
misfortune; that I believe that if it were not for you, sir, I would never hit
have the luck that I have; and in this I say as much truth as they are good
witnesses of it the most destos gentlemen who are present. What remains is
That tomorrow we get on our way, because today we will be able to do little
day, and in the rest of the good success that I hope, I will leave it to God and
value of your chest.
This was said by the discreet Dorotea, and when Don Quixote heard it, he turned to
Sancho, and, with signs of great anger, said to him:
-Now I tell you, Sanchuelo, that you are the greatest bellacuelo there is in Spain.
Tell me, homeless thief, didn't you just tell me now that this princess is
had returned in a maiden named Dorothea, and that the head that
I understand that I cut a giant, it was the whore who gave birth to you, with others
nonsense that put me in the biggest confusion I've ever been in
every day of my life? I vote ... -and he looked at the sky and gritted his teeth-
I'm about to wreak havoc on you, put salt on everyone's head
how many lying squires there are of knights errant, from here
forward, in the world!
`` Your grace be calm, my lord, '' answered Sancho, `` you might as well
be that I had been deceived in regard to the mutation of the lady
Princess Micomicona; but, as regards the head of the giant, or, at the
less, to the piercing of the leathers and to the blood being red wine, no
I'm mistaken, God lives !, because the hides there are wounded, at the head
the bed of your mercy, and the red wine has made a lake the
chamber; and if not, when you fry the eggs you will see it; I mean you will see it
when here his mercy of the landlord asks him to undermine everything. Of what
others, that the queen is as she was, I rejoice in the
soul, because my part is going to me, like every neighbor's child.
"Now I tell you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that you are a fool;" and
forgive me, and that's enough.
"Enough," said Don Fernando, "and no more talk about this; and, well, the lady
Princess says walk tomorrow, because today is late, do so, and
tonight we can spend it in good conversation until the next day,
where we will all accompany Mr. Don Quixote, because we want to be
witnesses of the courageous and unprecedented feats that he has to do in the
speech of this great company that he runs.
`` I am the one who has to serve you and accompany you, '' answered Don Quixote, `` and
I am very grateful for the mercy that is given to me and the good opinion that I receive
has, which I will try to make it true, or it will cost me my life, and even
more, if it can cost me more.
Many words of restraint and many offers passed between don
Quixote and Don Fernando; but a passenger who in
That season he entered the sale, which in his suit showed to be a Christian
had just come from the land of the Moors, because he came dressed in a
blue cloth, short of skirts, with half sleeves and no collar; The underpants
They were also made of blue canvas, with a bonnet of the same color; I had some
dated walking boots and a Moorish cutlass, placed in a taheli that
it pierced the chest. Then after him, on top of a donkey, a woman entered
the Moorish woman dressed, covered her face with a headdress; brought a
brocade bonnet, and dressed in an almalafa, who from the shoulders to the
feet covered her. He was the man of robust and handsome build, of little age.
more than forty years old, somewhat dark in the face, long mustaches and a beard
very well placed. In resolution, he showed in his good looks that if he were
well dressed, they will judge you as a person of quality and well-born.
Upon entering, he asked for a room, and, as he was told that the sale would not
there was, he showed regret; and, reaching the one in the suit
looked like a blackberry, he lowered her into his arms. Luscinda, Dorotea, the innkeeper, her daughter
and Maritornes, taken from the new and for them never seen suit, surrounded
the blackberry, and Dorotea, who was always graceful, restrained and discreet,
it seemed to her that both she and the one who brought her were grieved by the lack
of the room, he said:
-Don't be too sorry, my lady, for the present discomfort that is missing here,
as it is proper of sales not to be in them; but, with all this, yeah
You'd like to hang out with us, 'pointing at Luscinda,' maybe at the
discourse on this path you will have found other not so good welcomes.
The cloaked woman did not respond to this, nor did she do anything other than get up from
where he sat, and, with both hands crossed on his chest,
Bowing his head, he bent his body as a sign of appreciation. For his
They silently imagined that, without a doubt, she must be Moorish, and that she did not know
speak Christian. In this, the captive arrived, understanding something else
Until then he had been, and, seeing that they all had fenced off
She came with him, and that she kept silent when they told her, she said:
-My ladies, this maiden hardly understands my language, nor does she know how to speak another
none but according to his land, and for this he must not have answered,
nor does he respond, to what has been asked.
`` You are not asked anything else, '' answered Luscinda, `` but to offer
for tonight our company and part of the place where we will settle,
where the gift that comfort will offer will be made, with the will that
obliges to serve all foreigners who have need of it,
especially being a woman who is served.
`` For her and for me, '' replied the captive, `` I kiss you, my lady, your hands, and
I highly esteem and for what reason is the grant offered; that on such an occasion, and
of such people as your opinion shows, it can be seen that he has
to be very big.
"Tell me, sir," said Dorotea, "is this lady a Christian or a Moorish woman?" Because the
I suit and the silence makes us think that it is what we would not want it to be.
-Mora is in the suit and in the body, but in the soul it is very great
Christian, because she wants to be so.
-Then, is she not baptized? Luscinda replied.
`` There has been no place for it, '' replied the captive, `` after he left
Algiers, his homeland and land, and until now has not been in danger of
death so close that it forced Baptizalla without first knowing all
the ceremonies that our Mother the Holy Church commands; but God will be
served that soon be baptized with the decency that the quality of his person
he deserves, which is more than his habit and mine show.
With these reasons, he won over all who were listening to him.
know who the blackberry and the captive were, but nobody wanted to ask
by then, to see that that season was more to give them rest
than to ask them their lives. Dorotea took her by the hand and led her to
sit next to him, and begged him to take off his cloak. She looked at
captive, as if asking him to tell him what they said and what she would do.
He, in Arabic language, told him that they asked him to take off his cloak, and that he
did; and so he took it off, and discovered a face so beautiful that Dorotea
He thought her more beautiful than Luscinda, and Luscinda more beautiful than Luscinda.
Dorotea, and everyone around them knew that if anyone could
equal to that of the two, it was that of the blackberry, and there were even some who
they excelled in something. And, as beauty has prerogative and
grace to reconcile the spirits and attract the wills, then
they all gave in to the desire to serve and caress the beautiful blackberry.
Don Fernando asked the captive what the blackberry was called, who replied
that lela Zoraida; and, just as this she heard, she understood what they had
asked the Christian, and he said with great haste, full of anguish and
grace:
-No, not Zoraida: Maria, Maria! - hinting that her name was Maria and not
Zoraida.
These words, the great affection with which the Moorish spoke them, made
shed more than a tear to some of those who heard it,
especially to women, who by nature are tender and compassionate.
Luscinda embraced her with much love, saying:
-Yes, yes: Maria, Maria.
To which the blackberry replied:
-Yes, yes: Maria; Zoraida macange! -which means no.
At this point the night was coming, and, by order of those who came with gift
Fernando, the landlord had been diligent and careful to dress them with
dine as best he could. So when the time came, they sat down
everyone to a long table, like tinelo, because there was no round or
square in the sale, and gave the head and main seat, since
he refused, Don Quixote, who wanted the
Mrs. Micomicona, for he was her waiter. Then Luscinda sat and
Zoraida, and frontier dellas don Fernando and Cardenio, and then the captive and
the other gentlemen, and, next to the ladies, the priest and the barber. AND
thus, they dined with great contentment, and were further increased by seeing that,
to eat Don Quixote, moved by another spirit similar to the one that moved him
to speak as much as he spoke when he dined with the goatherds, he began to say:
- Truly, although it is considered, my lords, great and unprecedented
things see those who profess the order of the errant knighthood. If not, which one
of the living there will be in the world that now through the door of this castle
will enter, and how lucky we are to see us, to judge and believe that
we are who we are Who can say that this lady who is
my side is the great queen that we all know, and that I am that Knight of
the Sad Figure that walks around in the mouth of fame? Now there is no
doubt, but this art and exercise exceeds all those and those
invented by men, and all the more is to be held in esteem as to
more dangers is subject. Those who say that the letters
they make an advantage to the weapons, what will I tell them, and whoever they leave,
they know what they say. Because the reason that such people usually say, and what
they stick the most, is that the works of the spirit exceed those of the
body, and that weapons are exercised only with the body, as if it were their
exercise of the profession of ganapanes, for which it is not necessary more than good
forces; or as if in what we call weapons those who profess them do not know
enclose the acts of the fortress, which they ask to execute
much understanding; or as if the spirit of the warrior who has
in charge of an army, or the defense of a besieged city, as well as the
spirit as well as body. If not, see if it is achieved with the forces
bodily knowledge and conjecture of the enemy's intent, dignity,
stratagems, difficulties, preventing the harms that are feared; that
all these things are actions of the understanding, in whom it has no part
some the body. Being, therefore, that weapons require spirit, as
letters, let us now see which of the two spirits, that of the scholar or that of the
warrior, work harder. And this will come to be known by the end and whereabouts of
that each one is heading, because that intention has to be estimated in more
which has as its object noblest end. It is the end and whereabouts of the letters ...,
and I am not talking now about the divine ones, whose goal is to lead and direct
souls to heaven, that to an end as endless as this no other
can match; I speak of human letters, which is their end to put in their point
distributive justice and give each one what is his, understand and do
that the good laws are kept. End, by the way, generous and tall and worthy
of great praise, but not as much as the one to whom arms
serve, which have as their object and purpose peace, which is the greatest good
that men can desire in this life. And so the first good
news that the world had and men had were those that gave
angels the night that was our day, when they sang in the air:
Glory be in the highest, and peace on earth, to men of good
Will''; and to the salutation that the best teacher on earth and in heaven
taught his close friends and favorites, was to tell them that when they entered
some house, say: "Peace be in this house"; and many other times
He said: '' My peace I give you, my peace I leave you: peace be upon you '', as well as
jewel and garment given and left of such hand; jewel that without it, on earth or
there may be some good in heaven. This peace is the true end of the
war, which is the same to say weapons than war. Therefore, this is
truth, that the end of war is peace, and that in this the
end of the letters, let's come now to the works of the body of the lawyer and
those of the professor of weapons, and see which are older.
In such a way, and for such good terms, he continued his talk
Don Quixote who forced that, at that time, none of those who listened to him
they thought he was crazy; Before, as all the others were gentlemen, to
who are attached to the weapons, they listened very willingly; and he continued
saying:
-I say, then, that the student's works are these: mainly
poverty ( not because everyone is poor, but by putting this case in the whole
extreme that may be); and, having said that he suffers from poverty, it seems to me that
there was no need to say more about his bad luck, because he who is poor has no
good thing. This poverty suffers from its parts, already in hunger, already in
cold, already in nakedness, already in everything together; but, with all that, it is not so much that
do not eat, even if it is a little later than it is used, even if it is
leftovers from the rich; which is the greatest misery of the student this one who enters
they call the soup walk; and they do not lack some foreign brazier or
chimney, which, if it does not burn, at least warms its cold, and, in short, the
night they sleep below deck. I don't want to get to other trifles,
It is convenient to know, from the lack of shirts and not excess of shoes, the rarity
and little hair on the dress, nor that fading with such pleasure, when the good
luck holds a banquet for them. Down this road that I have painted, rough and
difficult, stumbling here, falling there, getting up there, turning to
fall here, they reach the degree they want; which reached, many of us have
seen that, having passed through these Sirtes and through these Scilas and Charybdis,
as carried in flight of favorable fortune, I say that we have seen them
command and rule the world from a chair, his hunger turned into satiety,
her cold in refreshment, her nakedness in finery, and her sleeping on a mat in
to rest in hollandaise and apricots: a justly deserved reward for their virtue.
But, contrasted and compared their works with those of the warrior army,
they lag far behind in everything, as I will now say.
Chapter XXXVIII. Which deals with the curious speech that Don Quixote made of
the weapons and the letters
Don Quixote continued, he said:
-Well, we start with the student through poverty and its parts, let's see if it is
richer the soldier. And we will see that there is no one poorer in it
poverty, because he is tied to the misery of his pay, which comes either late or
never, or what will rub off his hands, with notable danger to his life and
of your conscience. And sometimes her nudity tends to be so much, that a coleto
stabbed serves as his dress and shirt, and in the middle of winter he
usually repairs from the inclemency of the sky, being in the open campaign,
with only the breath of his mouth, which, as it comes out of an empty place, I have for
figured out that it must come out cold, against all nature. Well wait what
wait for the night to come, to recover from all these discomforts,
in the bed that awaits him, which, if not for his fault, will never sin
narrow; that it may well measure the feet it wants on the ground, and
to stir in it at will, without fear that the sheets will shrink.
Let the day and the hour arrive, then, to receive the degree of your
exercise; come one day of battle, there they will put the tassel on the
head, made of lint, to heal a bullet, which may have
past the temples, or it will ruin your arm or leg. And, when this
does not happen, but pious heaven keep you and keep you healthy and alive,
it may be that he stays in the same poverty that he was before, and that
it is necessary that one and the other encounter take place, one and another battle, and that
all come out victorious, to thrive in something; but these miracles look rare
times. But tell me, gentlemen, if you have looked into it: how less are they
the winners of the war than those who have perished in it? Definitely,
you have to answer that they have no comparison, nor can they be reduced to
counts the dead, and that the living winners can be counted with three
numeral letters. All this is the other way around in lawyers; because of
skirts, I don't mean sleeves, everyone has something to entertain themselves with.
So, although the soldier's work is greater, the reward is much less.
But to this it can be answered that it is easier to reward two thousand lawyers
than thirty thousand soldiers, because they are rewarded with giving
trades, which must be given to those of their profession, and they are not
They can be awarded but with the same property of the gentleman whom they serve; and
This impossibility further strengthens my reason. But let's leave this
apart, that it is a maze with a very difficult exit, but let's go back to
preeminence of weapons against letters, a matter that up to now is
to find out, according to the reasons that each one of your part alleges. AND,
Among those that I have said, the lyrics say that without them you could not
sustain arms, because war also has its laws and is subject to
to them, and that the laws fall under what are letters and letters. TO
This is the answer to the weapons that the laws will not be able to sustain without them,
because with arms the republics are defended, the kingdoms are preserved,
Cities are guarded, roads are secured, seas are cleared of
cosaries; and, finally, if it were not for them, the republics, the kingdoms,
monarchies, cities, land and sea roads would be subject to
to the rigor and confusion that war brings with it the time it lasts and
he is licensed to use his privileges and his strengths. And it is reason
found out that what costs more is estimated and should estimate more.
Reaching someone to be eminent in letters costs him time, vigils,
hunger, nakedness, headaches, stomach indigestion, and other
things to these adherents, which, in part, I already have referred to; more arrive
one by his terms to be a good soldier costs him everything
student, to a greater degree that has no comparison, because each
step is on the verge of losing his life. And what fear of need and poverty
It can neither reach nor tire the student, let it reach the one who has a soldier,
who, being encircled in some force, and being a post, or guard, in
some ravelin or gentleman, feel that the enemies are mining towards the
part where he is, and can not leave there for any reason, or flee
the danger that threatens you so closely? Only what you can do is give
news to his captain of what is happening, so that he can remedy it with some
countermine, and he would be left, fearing and waiting when unexpectedly
He has to go up to the clouds without wings and go down to the deep without his will. What if
This seems a small danger, let's see if it equals or makes advantages that of
ram two galleys by the prows in the middle of the spacious sea, which
dowelled and locked, the soldier has no more space than he allows
two feet of ram board; and, with all this, seeing what is in front of him
so many ministers of death that threaten him how many cannons of
artillery is attacked from the opposite side, which is not far from its body a
spear, and seeing that at the first neglect of the feet he would go to visit the
deep sinuses of Neptune; and, with all this, with intrepid heart,
carried away by the honor that prompts him, he becomes the target of so much
arquebus, and tries to pass through such a narrow passage to the opposite vessel. And the
What else is to admire: that hardly one has fallen where he will not be able to get up
until the end of the world, when another takes his place; and if this one too
falls into the sea, which as an enemy awaits, another and another succeeds him, without
give time to the time of their deaths: bravery and daring the greatest
it can be found at all times of war. Well have those
blessed centuries that lacked the dreadful fury of these
devilish instruments of artillery, whose inventor I have for myself
that in hell he is being given the prize of his diabolical invention,
with which he caused an infamous and cowardly arm to take the life of a
brave knight, and that, without knowing how or where, in the middle of the
Courage and verve that ignites and encourages the brave breasts, comes a
wild bullet, fired from the one who perhaps fled and was scared of the glare
that made the fire when firing from the damn machine, and it cuts and ends in a
instantly the thoughts and life of those who deserved it to enjoy long centuries.
And so, considering this, I am about to say that in my soul I regret having
taken this exercise of knight errant in age as detestable as it is
this is where we now live; because, although no danger puts me
fear, it still makes me suspicious to think whether gunpowder and tin have
take away the chance to become famous and known for the courage of my arm and
edges of my sword, for all that is discovered on earth. But do the
Heaven what will be served, how much will I be more esteemed, if I go out with what
that I pretend, how much greater dangers I have put than the
knights errant of past centuries.
All this long preamble said Don Quixote, while the others dined,
forgetting to put a bite in his mouth, since sometimes he had
Sancho Panza told him to have dinner, that later there would be a place to say everything
that I wanted. In those who listened there came a new pity to see
what a man who apparently had a good understanding and good speech in
all the things he dealt with, I would have lost him so completely, in
treating him of his black and peppery cavalry. The priest told him that he had
very right in all that he had said in favor of arms, and that he,
although literate and graduated, he was of his own opinion.
They finished supper, lifted the tablecloths, and, while the innkeeper, his
daughter and Maritornes adorned the camaranchón of Don Quixote de la Mancha,
where they had determined that that night the women alone in it
collected, Don Fernando begged the captive to tell them the speech of his
life, because it could not be other than that he was a pilgrim and
samples that he had begun to give, coming in the company of Zoraida. To what
to which the captive replied that he would very willingly do what was commanded,
and that he only feared that the story would not be such, that it would give them the pleasure
that he wanted; but that, with all that, for not failing to obey him,
would count. The priest and all the others thanked him, and again
they begged; and he, seeing himself begging from so many, said that there was no need for prayers
where the command was so powerful.
-And so, be your graces attentive, and you will hear a true speech,
who could it be that liars did not arrive that with curious and thought
artifice are usually made up.
With this he said, he made everyone settle in and lend him a large
be quiet; and he, seeing that they were already silent and waiting for what he wanted to say,
With a pleasant and calm voice, he began to say in this way:
Chapter XXXIX. Where the captive tells his life and events
- «In a place in the Mountains of León my lineage began, with whom
Nature was more grateful and liberal than fortune, although, in the
narrowness of those towns, my father still achieved a reputation for being rich, and
it really would be if that way he managed to conserve his estate as
it was given to him in gastalla. And the condition he had of being a liberal and a spender
It came from having been a soldier in his youth, which is a school
the soldiery where the petty is frank, and the frank, prodigal; what if
some soldiers are miserable, they are like monsters, they look strange
times. My father passed the terms of liberality, and bordered on those of
being prodigal: something that is of no benefit to a married man, and that
he has children who are to succeed him in name and in being. The ones that my
father had they were three, all males and all of age to be able to choose
state. Seeing, then, my father that, according to him, he could not go to the hand
Against his condition, he wanted to deprive himself of the instrument and cause that made him
spending and giving, which was depriving himself of the property, without which the same
Alejandro seems cramped.
And so, calling the three of us one day alone in a room, he told us
reasons similar to those that I will now say: `` Children, to tell you that you
I want well, it is enough to know and say that you are my children; and, to understand that
I love you badly, it is enough to know that I am not going hand in hand when it comes to
keep your property. Well, so that you understand from here on
that I love you as a father, and that I do not want to destroy you as a stepfather,
I want to do something with you that I have thought about for many days
and with mature consideration willing. You are already old enough to drink
state, or, at least, to choose exercise, such that, when you grow up, you
honor and profit. And what I have thought is to make my farm four
parts: the three I will give to you, to each one what will be his share, without
exceed one thing, and with the other I will stay to live and
sustain me the days that heaven is served to give me life. But
I would like that, after each one had in his possession his part
of your farm, follow one of the paths that I will tell you. There is a saying in
our Spain, in my opinion very true, as they all are, for being
short sentences drawn from long and discreet experience; and the one that I
I say says: "Church, or sea, or royal house", as if more clearly said:
"Whoever wants to be worth and be rich, follow either the Church, or navigate, exercising
the art of merchandise, or enter to serve the kings in their homes "; because
They say: "Better a king's crumb than a lord's mercy." I say this because
I would like, and it is my will, for one of you to follow the lyrics, the other
the merchandise, and the other served the king in the war, as it is difficult
enter to serve him in his house; that, since war does not give much wealth,
it usually gives a lot of value and a lot of fame. In eight days, I will give you all
your part in money, without letting you down in a trick, as you will see by
the work. Tell me now if you want to follow my opinion and advice on what you
I have proposed. '' And, commanding me, for being the oldest, to answer,
after having told him not to get rid of the farm, but to
spent everything that was his will, that we were young men to know
win it, I came to conclude that it would fulfill his taste, and that mine was to continue
the exercise of arms, serving in him God and my king. The second
Brother made the same offers, and chose to go to the Indies,
taking employed the hacienda that would fit her. The minor, and, to what I
I think, the most discreet, said he wanted to follow the Church, or go to finish
his begun studies in Salamanca. Just as we just agreed and
choose our exercises, my father hugged us all, and, with the
brevity that he said, he did what he had promised us; and, giving
each his part, which, to what I remember, was every three thousand
ducats, in money (because one of our uncle bought the whole farm and
paid in cash, because he did not leave the trunk of the house), in the same day
all three of us said goodbye to our good father; and, in that same,
seeming to me to be inhumanity that my father was old and with so little
estate, I made him take the two thousand ducats out of my three thousand,
because the rest was enough for me to accommodate what I needed a
soldier. My two brothers, moved by my example, each gave him a thousand
ducats: so my father had four thousand left in money, and more
three thousand, which, it seems, was worth the property that he had, which he did not want
sell, but stay with it in roots. I say, well, that we said goodbye
of him and that our uncle that I have said, not without much feeling and
everyone's tears, entrusting us to let you know, every time
that there was comfort for it, of our events, prosperous or adverse.
We promised it, and, embracing us and giving us his blessing, the one took the
from Salamanca, the other from Seville and I from Alicante, where I had
news that there was a Gynovese ship that loaded wool there for Genoa.
"This one will be twenty-two years ago since I left my father's house, and in all
them, since I have written some letters, I have not heard from him or my
new brothers some. And what in this speech of time I have spent what
I will say briefly. I embarked in Alicante, I arrived with a prosperous trip to
Genoa, I went from there to Milan, where I settled down with arms and some
soldier finery, from where I wanted to go to settle my square in Piedmont; and,
on my way to Alejandría de la Palla, I had news that the great
Duke of Alba went to Flanders. I moved purpose, go with him, serve him in
the days he did, I found myself in the death of the counts of Eguemon and of
Hornos, I became an ensign to a famous Guadalajara captain named
Diego de Urbina; and some time after I arrived in Flanders,
news from the league that the Holiness of Pope Pius Quinto,
remembrance, he had done with Venice and Spain, against the common enemy,
what is the Turk; which, at that same time, had won with his army
the famous island of Cyprus, which was under the rule of the Venetian: and
regrettable and miserable loss. Suppose it was true that it was generally
the serene Don Juan of Austria, natural brother of our good King
Don Felipe. The great apparatus of war that was being made was disclosed. All the
which incited me and moved my spirit and the desire to see me on the day that
I expected; and, although he had hints, and almost certain promises, that in the
The first time he offered he would be promoted to captain, I wanted to leave him
everything and come, as I came, to Italy. And my good luck wanted him to
Mr. Don Juan de Austria had just arrived in Genoa, which was going to Naples
to join the Venetian army, as he later did in Mecina.
I say, finally, that I found myself on that very happy day, already done
infantry captain, to whose honorable charge my good fortune, plus
than my merits. And that day, which was for Christendom so
happy, because in him the world and all nations were disillusioned with error
they were in, believing that the Turks were invincible by sea: in
that day, I say, where the broken Ottoman pride and arrogance remained,
among as many fortunate as there were (because more fortunate had the
Christians who died there than those who were alive and victorious), I
I was only the unfortunate one, because, instead of what I could wait, if it were in
Roman centuries, some naval crown, I saw myself that night that followed
such a famous day with chains at the feet and handcuffs.
»And it was such luck: that, having the Uchalí, king of Algiers, daring and
fortunate cosario, rammed and surrendered the captain of Malta, who only three
Knights were left alive in it, and these badly wounded, the captain came
from Juan Andrea to succorrella, in which I went with my company; and, doing
what I owed on a similar occasion, I jumped on the opposite galley, which,
deviating from the one that had struck her, it hindered my soldiers
continue, and thus, I found myself alone among my enemies, whom I could not
resist, for being so many; in short, they rendered me full of wounds. And, as already
you have heard, gentlemen, that the Uchalí was saved with all his squad,
I came to be captive in his power, and I was only the sad one among so many
joyful and the captive among so many free; because it was fifteen thousand
Christians who that day achieved the desired freedom, who all
they came rowing in the turquoise navy.
»They took me to Costantinople, where the Great Turk Selim became general of the
sea ​​to my master, because he had done his duty in battle, having carried
the standard of the Maltese religion as proof of its value. Find me the
second year, which was seventy-two, in Navarino, rowing in the
captain of the three lanterns. I saw and noticed the occasion that there was lost of not
take the entire Turkish army in the port, because all the leavers and
Janissaries who came in it were certain that they were to be rammed
within the same port, and they had ready their clothes and railing, which are their
shoes, to then flee overland, without waiting to be fought: both
it was the fear they had taken on our army. But heaven commanded
otherwise, not because of the general's fault or carelessness that ours
ruled, but for the sins of Christendom, and because it wants and allows
God that we always have executioners who punish us.
»In effect, the Uchalí was collected from Modón, which is an island that is next to
Navarino, and, throwing the people ashore, fortified the mouth of the port, and
He stayed until Mr. Don Juan turned around. On this trip it was taken
the galley that was called La Presa, whose captain was a son of that
famous Barbarossa cosario. The captain of Naples, called La Loba, took her,
ruled by that ray of war, by the father of soldiers, by that
fortunate and never defeated Captain Álvaro de Bazán, Marquis of Santa
Cross. And I don't want to stop saying what happened at the La Presa dam.
The son of Barbarossa was so cruel, and treated his captives so badly, that,
just as those who came to the oar saw that the Loba galley was entering them
and that he reached them, they all released their oars at once, and seized their
Captain, who was on the shelf yelling to row quickly, and
passing him from bench to bench, from stern to bow, they gave him bites, which soon
the more that he passed from the tree, his soul had already passed to hell: such was, as
I have said, the cruelty with which he treated them and the hatred they had for him.
"We returned to Constantinople, and the following year, which was seventy-five
three, it was learned in her how Senor don Juan had won Tunisia, and
taken that kingdom from the Turks and placed in possession of Muley Hamet,
cutting off the hopes that Muley Hamida, the
cruellest and bravest Moor the world ever had. He felt this loss very much
the Great Turk, and, using the sagacity that all of his household have,
he made peace with the Venetians, who desired it much more than he; and the year
following seventy-four he attacked the Goleta and the fort that together with
Tunisia had left Senor don Juan half up. In all these
trances I was rowing, without hope of any freedom; at least no
He hoped to have her as a ransom, because he was determined not to write the
news of my misfortune to my father.
Finally, the Schooner was lost; the fort was lost, on which squares
there were paid Turkish soldiers, seventy-five thousand, and Moors, and
Arabs from all over Africa, more than four hundred thousand, accompanied by this
large numbers of people with so much ammunition and war supplies, and with
so many spenders, that with their hands and handfuls of earth they could cover
the Schooner and the fort. The schooner was lost first, held until then
for impregnable; and it was not lost because of its defenders, who
did in his defense all that they should and could, but because the
experience showed the ease with which trenches could be erected in
that deserted sand, because within two feet was water, and the Turks
They did not find her at two rods; and so, with many sandbags they raised the
trenches so high that they overcame the ramparts of force; and,
throwing knights at them, none could stop, or assist in the defense. It was
common opinion that ours were not to be locked up in the Schooner, but
wait in the field for the landing stage; and those who say this speak from afar
and with little experience of similar cases, because if in the Goleta and in the
strong there were barely seven thousand soldiers, how could so few numbers, although
more exerted they were, to go out to the campaign and to remain in the forces, against
as much as it was that of the enemies ?; and how is it possible to stop getting lost
force that is not helped, and more when surrounded by many enemies and
stubborn, and in their own land? But to many it seemed, and so I
It seemed to me that it was a particular grace and grace that heaven did to Spain
in allowing that office and cloak of wickedness to lay waste, and that
rubber or sponge and moth of the infinity of money that there without profit
were spent, serving no other purpose than preserving the memory of having
won the congratulations of the undefeated Carlos Quinto; as if it were necessary
to make it eternal, as it is and will be, that those stones
will sustain.
The fort was also lost; but the Turks were gaining
span, because the soldiers who defended it fought so bravely and
strongly, that there were twenty-five thousand enemies who killed in
twenty-two general assaults they were given. None captivated sane of
three hundred who were left alive, a sure and clear sign of their effort and courage,
and how well they had defended and guarded their places. Surrendered to
split a small fort or tower that was in the middle of the tin, in charge
of Don Juan Zanoguera, Valencian gentleman and famous soldier. They captivated
Don Pedro Puertocarrero, general of the Goleta, who did everything he could
possible by defending your strength; and he was so sorry to have lost her that
Regret died on the road to Constantinople, where he was being taken captive.
They anxiously captivated the general of the fort, whose name was Gabrio
Cervellón, Milanese gentleman, great engineer and most courageous soldier.
Many people died in these two forces, of which it was
a Pagán de Oria, gentleman of the habit of San Juan, of generous condition,
as shown by the utmost liberality that he used with his brother, the famous Juan
by Andrea de Oria; and what made his death most painful was to have died
the hands of some Arabs whom he trusted, seeing the fort already lost, which
offered to take him in Moorish habit to Tabarca, which is a port or
house that gynoveses have on those shores who exercise in the
coral fishery; which Arabs cut off his head and gave it to him
they trucked the general of the Turkish army, who complied with them
our Castilian saying: "That even if the betrayal postpones, the traitor
hates "; and thus, it is said that the general ordered to hang those who
They brought the present, because they had not been brought to him alive.
»Among the Christians who got lost in the fort, there was one called Don
Pedro de Aguilar, a native I do not know from what place in Andalusia, which had
He was an ensign in the fort, a soldier of great account and of rare understanding:
especially he was particularly funny in what they call poetry. Say it
because his luck brought my galley and my bank, and to be a slave to me
same pattern; and, before we left that port, he did this
gentleman two sonnets, by way of epitaphs, one to the Schooner and the other
to the strong. And in truth I have to say them, because I know them by heart and
I think they will cause pleasure rather than regret first. "
At the point that the captive named Don Pedro de Aguilar, Don Fernando looked
to his comrades, and all three smiled; and, when he came to say of the
sonnets, said the one:
-Before your grace passes forward, I beg you to tell me what was done
Don Pedro de Aguilar who has said.
`` What I know is, '' replied the captive, `` that after two years he was in
Constantinople fled in an arnaúte suit with a Greek spy, and I don't know if
came free, since I think so, because a year later I saw the
Greek in Constantinople, and I could not ask him the event of that trip.
`` Well, it was, '' replied the knight, `` because that Don Pedro is my brother,
and he is now in our place, good and rich, married with three children.
`` Thanks be to God, '' said the captive, `` for as many favors as you
did; because there is no on earth, according to my opinion, glad that I know
equals to achieve lost freedom.
"And more," replied the knight, "that I know the sonnets that my brother made."
Tell them, then, your grace, said the captive, who will know how to say them better.
that I.
"May I please," replied the knight; and that of the Goleta read like this:
Chapter XL. Where the story of the captive is continued
Sonnet
Happy souls that of the mortal veil
free and happy, for the good that you did,
from the low ground you rose
to the highest and best of heaven,
and, burning with anger and honorable zeal,
you exerted force of bodies,
that you colored in your own and other people's blood
the neighboring sea and sandy soil;
first that the courage lacked life
in the tired arms, that, dying,
by being defeated, they are victorious.
And there is your mortal, sad fall
between the wall and the iron, it is acquiring you
fame that the world gives you, and heaven gives glory.
"I know the same way," said the captive.
"Well, the one from the fort, if I remember correctly," said the knight, "says like this:
Sonnet
From among this barren land, overthrown,
these lumps on the ground thrown,
the holy souls of three thousand soldiers
they went up alive to a better home,
being first, in vain, exercised
the strength of his strong arms,
until, at last, few and tired,
gave life to the edge of the sword.
And this is the ground that has continued
of a thousand regrettable memories filled
in the past and present centuries.
But no more fair from her hard bosom
souls will have risen to the clear sky,
not even he held such brave bodies.
The sonnets did not seem bad, and the captive rejoiced at the news that
his comrade gave him; and, continuing his tale, he said:
- «The Schooner and the fort, then, surrendered, the Turks gave order in
dismantle the schooner, because the fort was such that there was nothing to
on land, and to do it more quickly and with less work, they mined it for
three parts; but with none it was possible to fly what seemed less strong,
which were the old walls; and everything that had been left standing
new fortification that the Fratín had made, very easily came to
Earth. In resolution, the army returned to Constantinople, triumphant and
winner: and a few months later my master Uchalí, who was called
Uchalí Fartax, which means, in the Turkish language, the vicious renegade,
because it was; and it is customary among the Turks to name themselves after some
They lack that they have, or of some virtue that there is in them. And this is why not
There are among them but four family names of lineages, which descend from the house
Ottoman, and the others, as I have said, take their first and last names from the
blemishes of the body and already of the virtues of the spirit. And this Tiñoso rode the
rowing, being a slave of the Great Lord, fourteen years, already more than thirty and
four of his age denied, in spite of the fact that a Turk, while rowing,
he slapped him, and in order to avenge himself he left his faith; and it was so much his value
that, without climbing the clumsy means and paths that the most private of the
Great Turk ascend, he became king of Algiers, and later, to be general of the
sea, which is the third position in that manor. He was a Calabrian from
nation, and morally he was a good man, and treated with great humanity to
his captives, who came to have three thousand, who, after his death,
were divided, as he left it in his testament, among the Great Lord (who
He is also the heir son of all those who die, and he enters the part with the most
children left by the deceased) and among his renegades; and I fit a renegade
Venetian who, being the cabin boy of a ship, was captivated by the Uchalí, and
so much so that he was one of his most gifted garzones, and he became the
cruellest renegade ever seen. It was called Azán Agá, and it became
very rich, already to be king of Algiers; with whom I came from Constantinople, something
happy, for being so close to Spain, not because I thought to write to anyone
unfortunate event of mine, but to see if luck was more favorable to me in
Algiers than in Constantinople, where I had already tried a thousand ways to escape,
and none had season or luck; and I was thinking of Algiers to seek other means of
achieve what I wanted so much, because the hope of
have freedom; and when in what he manufactured, thought and put into action,
the event corresponded to the intention, then, without abandoning myself, I pretended and
I was looking for another hope that would sustain me, even if I was weak and skinny.
"With this he entertained life, locked up in a prison or house that
Turks call bath, where they lock up Christian captives, as well as those who
they belong to the king as well as to some individuals; and those who call from the warehouse, that
It is like saying captives of the council, who serve the city in the works
he does and in other trades, and these such captives have very
difficult their freedom, which, as they are common and have no master
In particular, there is no one to deal with his rescue, even if they have him. In these
Baths, as I have said, usually carry some private individuals to their captives
of the town, mainly when they are rescue, because there they have them
baggy and secure until rescue comes. Also the captives of the king
who are rescuers do not go to work with the other rabble, if not when
their rescue is delayed; that then, for making them write for him with more
hard work, they make them work and fetch firewood with the others, which is a no
little job.
So I was one of the rescuers; that, as it was known that he was a captain,
since I said my little possibility and lack of finances, he did not take advantage of anything
so that they would not put me in the number of the knights and rescue people.
They put a chain on me, more as a sign of rescue than to keep me with it;
and thus, he spent his life in that bathroom, with many other gentlemen and people
main, designated and considered rescue. And although hunger and
Nakedness can tire us at times, and even most of the time, nothing can
tired as much as hearing and seeing, at every step, the never seen or heard
cruelties that my master used on Christians. Every day he hung his,
he impaled this one, he impaled the ear; and this, for so little occasion, and so without
her, that the Turks knew that she did it just for doing it, and for being
His natural condition is to be a murderer of the whole human race. Just freed
well with him a Spanish soldier, called such de Saavedra, who, having
done things that will remain in the memory of those people for many years,
and all to achieve freedom, he never gave him a stick, nor did he command him to give it, nor
said a bad word; and, for the least thing of many that he did, we all feared
that he was to be impaled, and so he feared more than once; and if it weren't
because time does not give place, I would now say something about what this soldier
made it part to entertain you and admire you much better than with the
I tell my story.
"I say, then, that over the courtyard of our prison the windows of
the house of a rich and leading Moor, which, as usual are the
of the Moors, more were holes than windows, and even these were covered with
very thick and tight lattices. So it happened that one day, being in a
rooftop of our prison with three other companions, doing tests of
jump with the chains, to entertain the time, being alone, because
all the other Christians had gone out to work, perhaps I raised my eyes and
I saw that through those closed windows that I said it looked like a reed, and
at the top of it he put a canvas tied, and the cane was being brandished and
moving, almost as if beckoning us to reach for it. We look at
it, and one of those who were with me went to get under the cane, for
see if they released her, or what they did; but, as it arrived, they raised the cane
and they moved it to both sides, as if they were saying no with their heads. Turned
the Christian, and returned to lower and make the same movements that
first. It was another of my companions, and the same happened to him as the first.
Finally, it was the third and let him know what to the first and the second. Seeing
I did this, I did not want to stop trying my luck, and, just as I got to wear
under the reed, they dropped it, and it hit my feet inside the bath. I went
then to untie the canvas, in which I saw a knot, and inside it came ten
cyanis, which are low gold coins used by the Moors, which each
worth ten reais of ours. If I was happy with the find, there is no reason
what to say, because it was both the contentment and the admiration of thinking of
where that good could come, especially to me, since the samples of
not having wanted to let go of the rod but to me of course they said that the
mercy. I took my good money, broke the cane, went back to the terradillo, looked at the
window, and I saw that a very white hand came out of it, that they opened it and
They closed very quickly. With this we understood, or imagined, that some woman
that he lived in that house, he should have made us that profit; and in
sign that we appreciated it, we made zalemas to use Moors, inclining the
head, bending the body and putting the arms on the chest. From there to
little did they take out a small cross made of reeds through the same window, and then
they re-entered her. This sign confirmed that some Christian
She must have been a captive in that house, and it was the one that did us good;
but the whiteness of the hand, and the bangles that we saw in it, undid us
this thought, since we imagine that it must be Christian
renegade, who is usually taken for legitimate women by their
masters, and still have a chance, because they esteem them more than
of their nation.
In all our speeches we gave very far from the truth of the case; and so,
all our entertainment from then on was to watch and have for
north to the window where the star of the reed had appeared to us; but
Well, fifteen days passed in which we did not see her, nor the hand either, nor another
any sign. And, although at this time we try with every request to know
who lived in that house, and if there was any renegade Christian in it,
There was never anyone who told us otherwise, but that a Moor lived there
chief and rich, named Agi Morato, warden who had been of La Pata,
which is a high quality trade among them. More, when more neglected
We were sure that more cyanis would rain there, we saw at the wrong time
look like the reed, and another canvas on it, with another more grown knot; and that
It was just in time that he was in the bathroom, like last time, alone and without people.
We did the customary test, each one going first than me, of the
The same three that we were, but none of the cane surrendered but me,
because when I arrived, they dropped it. I untied the knot, and found forty
Spanish gold shields and a piece of paper written in Arabic, and after
written made into a large cross. I kissed the cross, took the shields, turned to the
rooftop, we made all our zalemas, the hand turned to look like, I made
signs that he would read the paper, they closed the window. We are all confused and
happy with what happened; and, as none of us did not understand the
Arabic, the desire we had to understand what the paper
it contained, and the difficulty of finding someone to read it was even more difficult.
"Anyway, I decided to trust a renegade, a native of Murcia, who
he had considered himself a great friend of mine, and put garments between the two of us,
they forced to keep the secret that I entrusted to him; because some usually
renegades, when they intend to return to the land of Christians,
bring with him some signatures of principal captives, in which they attest, in the
way that they can, as such a renegade is a good man, and that he has always
done good to Christians, and that carries a desire to flee at the first time
that is offered. Some there are who seek these fees with good intention,
others make use of them, perhaps and of industry: that, coming to rob land
Christians, if they are lost or captivated, they draw their signatures and
They say that by those papers the purpose for which they came will be seen, which
was to stay in the land of Christians, and that is why they came in Corsican with
the other Turks. With this they escape from that first impetus, and
they reconcile with the Church, without being hurt; and, when they see the
theirs, they return to Barbary to be what they were before. Others have to use
these papers, and they procure them, with good intent, and remain in the land of
Christians.
Well, one of the renegades that I have said was this my friend, who had
signatures of all our comrades, where we credited how much it was
possible; And if the Moors found these papers for him, they would burn him alive. I knew
that he knew Arabic very well, and not only speak it, but write it; but,
Before I fully pleaded with him, I told him to read me that paper,
that perhaps he had found me in a hole in my ranch. He opened it, and there was a
good space looking at him and building him, muttering through his teeth.
I asked him if he understood; He told me very well, and if he wanted me to
declare word for word, that I give him ink and pen, because it was better
did. Then let us tell him what he asked for, and little by little he translated it;
and, at the end, he said: '' Everything that goes here in romance, without missing lyrics,
It is what this Moorish paper contains; and it should be noted that where it says
Lela Marién means Our Lady the Virgin Mary. ''
»We read the paper, and it read like this:
When I was a child, my father had a slave, who in my language
He showed the Christian zalá, and told me many things about Lela Marién. The
Christian died, and I know that she did not go to the fire, but with Allah, because after
I saw her twice, and she told me to go to Christian land to see Lela
Marien, who loved me very much. I do not know how it goes: I have seen many Christians
through this window, and no one has seemed a gentleman to me but you. I am very
beautiful and girl, and I have a lot of money to carry with me: look at you if
You can make how we go, and you will be my husband there, if you want, and if not
you want, nothing will be given to me, that Lela Marien will give me whoever I marry.
I wrote this; look who you give it to read: don't trust any Moor,
because they are all marfuces. I am very sorry for this: I would like you not to
you will discover no one, because if my father knows, he will throw me out later in a
well, and it will cover me with stones. I will put a thread on the reed: tie the
answer; And if you don't have someone to write you Arabic, tell me by signs, that
Lela Marién will make him understand you. She and Allah keep you, and that cross that I
kiss many times; That is how the captive sent it to me.
Look, gentlemen, if it was a reason that the reasons for this paper admired us and
rejoice. And so, the one and the other was in a way that the renegade understood
that this paper had not been found, but actually some of
we had written; and thus, he begged us that if it was true what
suspected, that we would trust him and tell him, that he would venture his
life for our freedom. And, saying this, he took from his chest a crucifix of
metal, and with many tears he swore by God that that image
represented, in whom he, though sinful and evil, believed well and faithfully,
to keep us loyalty and secrecy in everything we want to discover him,
because it seemed to him, and he almost understood that, by means of what that
paper had written, had he and all of us have freedom, and see each other
him in what he wanted so much, which was to reduce himself to the guild of the Holy
Church, his mother, from whom as a rotten member he was divided and estranged
for their ignorance and sin.
With so many tears and with signs of so much repentance, the
renegade, that we all agree with the same appearance, and we come in
declare the truth of the case; and thus, we realized everything, without
hide anything from you. Let's show him the window where the cane looked like, and he
marked the house from there, and he had to take special and great care of
find out who lived there. We agreed, anxiously, that it would be alright
respond to the default ticket; and, as we had someone who knew how to do it,
then at the moment the renegade wrote the reasons that I was noticing,
which were precisely what I will say, because of all the points
substantial events that happened to me in this event, none have left me
memory, it will not even go away as long as I have life.
»In effect, what was answered to the Moor was this:
May the true Allah keep you, my lady, and that blessed Marien, who is the
true mother of God and she is the one who has put it in your heart that you go to
land of Christians, because it loves you well. Beg him to use
make you understand how you can put into practice what he commands you, that she is
so good it will. From me and from all these Christians who
are with me, I offer to do for you everything we can, until
To die. Do not stop writing to me and let me know what you intend to do, that I will
I will always answer; that the great Allah has given us a captive Christian who
knows how to speak and write your language as well as you will see it on this paper. A) Yes
that, without being afraid, you can tell us about everything you want. What
You say that if you go to the land of Christians, that you have to be my wife, I will
I promise as a good Christian; and knows that Christians do what
they promise better than the Moors. Allah and Marien, his mother, be your guardian,
my lady.
»Having written and closed this paper, I waited two days for the bathroom to be
alone, as I used to, and then I went out at the usual step of the terradillo, to see
if the reed seemed, it did not take long to appear. The way I saw her, although not
I could see who was playing it, I showed the paper, as if to imply that
put the thread, but it was already attached to the reed, to which I tied the paper, and
from there little by little our star again appeared, with the white flag of
peace of the coffin. They let it fall, and I lifted it up, and found it in the cloth, in all
lucky silver and gold coin, more than fifty escudos, which
fifty times more they doubled our happiness and confirmed the hope of
have freedom.
That same night our renegade returned, and told us that he had learned
that in that house lived the same Moor who had told us that
His name was Agi Morato, very rich in all respects, which had only one
daughter, heir to his entire estate, and that it was a common opinion throughout the
city ​​to be the most beautiful woman of Barbary; and that many of the
Viceroys who came there had asked her for a wife, and that she never
he had wanted to marry; and that he also learned that he had a captive Christian, that
he had already died; all of which agreed with what came on paper.
We then went into counsel with the renegade, in what order would it be held for
take out the moor and come all to the land of Christians, and, finally,
agreed by then that we wait for Zoraida's second notice, which
called the one who now wants to be called Maria; because well we saw that she, and
no other was the one that was to give way to all those difficulties.
After we were at this, the renegade said not to be sorry, that
he would either lose his life or set us free.
»Four days the bathroom was with people, which was the occasion that four days
it took time to look like the reed; after which, in the customary
solitude of the bathroom, it seemed with the canvas so pregnant, that a very happy
delivery promised. The reed and the canvas leaned down to me, I found another paper in it
and a hundred gold shields, without any other coin. The renegade was there,
let us tell him to read the paper inside our ranch, which he said that so
He said:
I don't know, my lord, how to order that we go to Spain, nor does Lela Marién
He has told me, although I have asked him. What can be done is that
I will give you a lot of gold money through this window: rescue yourselves with
them and your friends, and go one in the land of Christians, and buy there
a boat and come back for the others; and they will find me in my garden
father, who is at the door of Babazón, next to the marina, where I have
spend all this summer with my father and my servants. From there, at night,
You can take me out without fear and take me to the boat; and look that you have to be my
husband, because if not, I will ask Marien to punish you. If you don't trust
no one to go by the boat, rescue yourself and see, I know you will return
better than another, because you are a gentleman and a Christian. Try to know the garden, and
when you walk around I will know that the bathroom is alone, and I will give you a lot
money. Allah preserve you, my Lord.
This said and contained the second paper. Which seen by everyone, everyone
offered to want to be the rescued one, and promised to come and go with all
punctuality, and I also offered myself the same; to which the
renegade, saying that he would in no way allow anyone to get out of
freedom until they were all together, because the experience had
shown how badly the free complied with the words they gave in the
captivity; because many times they had used that remedy some
main captives, rescuing one who went to Valencia, or Mallorca,
with money to be able to build a boat and return for those who had
rescued, and had never returned; because the freedom achieved and the fear
of not losing her again, he erased all the obligations from their memory
of the world. And, in confirmation of the truth that he was telling us, he told us
briefly a case that almost at that very time had happened to some
Christian gentlemen, the strangest that ever happened in those parts,
where at every step things of great fear and admiration happen.
Indeed, he came to say that what could and should be done was that the
money to be given to rescue the Christian, to be given to him
to buy a boat there in Algiers, on account of becoming a merchant and
dealer in Tetouan and on that coast; and that, being the lord of the boat,
It would easily be traced to remove them from the bathroom and ship them all.
How much more, that if the blackberry, as she said, gave money to rescue them
to all, that, being free, it was very easy even to embark on the
half day; and that the greatest difficulty was that the Moors
They do not allow any renegade to buy or have a boat, if it is not a vessel
great to go in corso, because they fear that whoever buys a boat,
especially if he is Spanish, he does not want her except to go to the land of
Christians; but that he would ease this inconvenience by making a
Moor Tagarino went to the party with him in the company of the boat and in the
profit of merchandise, and with this shadow he would become lord of the
boat, with which everything else was finished.
And since I and my comrades had thought better of sending
by boat to Mallorca, as the blackberry said, we dare not contradict him,
fearful that if we did not do what he said, we would discover and
put their lives in danger if he discovered Zoraida's deal,
for whose life we ​​would all give ours. And so, we determined to get
in the hands of God and in those of the renegade, and at that very point
responded to Zoraida, telling her that we would do everything she advised us,
because he had warned him as well as if Lela Marién had told him,
and that she was alone in delaying that business, or put it to work later.
I offered him again to be her husband, and with this, another day that happened to
being alone in the bathroom, at various times, with the cane and the cloth, gave us two
thousand gold shields, and a paper where it said that the first jumá, which is the
Friday, he was going to his father's garden, and that before he left he would give us
more money, and if that was not enough, let us notify him, let us
he would give whatever we asked him: that his father had so many, that he would not throw him out
The less, the more, that she had the keys to everything.
We then gave the renegade five hundred escudos to buy the boat; with
eight hundred I rescued myself, giving the money to a Valencian merchant who
the season was in Algiers, who rescued me from the king, taking me on
his word, giving it that with the first vessel that came from Valencia
I would pay my ransom; because if I later gave the money, it would give suspicions to the
king that there were many days that my ransom was in Algiers, and that the
The merchant, because of his farms, had silenced him. Finally, my master was so
pensive that in no way did I dare to disburse the
money. The Thursday before Friday that the beautiful Zoraida had to go
to the garden, he gave us another thousand escudos and warned us of his departure, begging me
that, if he rescued me, he would then know his father's garden, and that in all
In case he looked for an opportunity to go there and see her. Answer him in a few words that
He would do so, and that he was careful to entrust us to Lela Marién, with
all those prayers the captive had taught her.
"This done, they gave order in which the three of our companions
rescued, to facilitate the exit from the bathroom, and because, seeing me
rescued, and not them, because there was money, do not get upset and
let the devil persuade them to do something to the detriment of Zoraida;
that, since being who they were could assure me of this fear, with
all that, I did not want to put the business in adventure, and so, I made them rescue
by the same order that I rescued myself, giving all the money to the
merchant, so that, with certainty and security, he could make the surety; to the
which we never discovered our deal and secret, because of the danger there was.
Chapter XLI. Where the captive still continues his success
»Fifteen days did not go by, when our renegade had already bought a
very good boat, capable of more than thirty people: and, to ensure your
done and give it color, he wanted to make, as he did, a trip to a place that
called Sargel, who is thirty leagues from Algiers towards the part of Oran, in
which there are many hiring of figs steps. Two or three times did this
trip, in the company of the Tagarino who had said. Tagarinos call in
Barbary to the Moors of Aragon, and those of Granada, Mudejar; and in the
kingdom of Fez call the Mudejar elches, which are the people of
who that king is most used in war.
"I mean, then, that every time he passed by with his boat, he hit bottom in a cove
that it was not two crossbow shots from the garden where Zoraida waited; and
there, very on purpose, the renegade with the andirons that roamed
rowing, or to do the zala, or as if to make fun of what
I really thought I would do; and thus, he went to Zoraida's garden and asked her
fruit, and his father gave it to him without acquaintance; and, although he wanted to speak to
Zoraida, as he later told me, and say that he was the one who by my order
I was to take him to the land of Christians, that she be happy and safe,
it was never possible, because the blackberries are not seen by any Moor or
Turkish, if not her husband or father sent it to her. Of christians
captives allow themselves to be treated and communicated, even more than what would be
reasonable; and I would have been sorry that he had spoken it, that perhaps
rampage, seeing that his business was on the lips of renegades. But God,
that ordered it otherwise, did not give rise to the good wish that our
renegade had; which, seeing how surely he came and went to Sargel, and
that gave background when and how and where he wanted, and that the tagarino, his
partner, I had no more will than yours ordered, and that I
was already rescued, and that only needed to look for some Christians who
rowing the oar, he told me to see which ones he wanted to bring with me, outside
of the rescued, and that he had them spoken for the first Friday, where
I had determined that it was our departure. Seeing this, I spoke to twelve
Spaniards, all brave men of the oar, and of those who most
they could freely leave the city; and it was no small thing to find so many in
that juncture, because there were twenty vessels in privateering, and they had
led all the people to row, and they would not be found, were it not that their
master stayed that summer without going in corso, to finish a galley that had
in shipyard. To whom I did not say anything else, but that the first
Friday afternoon they went out one by one, secretly, and left the
back from the garden of Agi Morato, and that they would wait for me there until I
was. To each one I gave this notice in their own right, with an order that, although there
see other Christians, do not tell them but that I had commanded them
wait in that place.
Once this diligence was done, I needed to do another one, which was the one that most
It was convenient: and it was to notify Zoraida at the point that the
business, so that she was alert and on notice, that she did not
startled if we suddenly assaulted her before she could
imagine that the boat of Christians could return. And so, I determined to go to
garden and see if I could speak it; and, on the occasion of picking some herbs, a
day, before my departure, I went there, and the first person I met
It was with his father, who told me, in a language that in all Barbary, and even
in Costantinopla, it is found between captives and Moors, which is neither Moorish, nor
Castilian, nor of any other nation, but a mixture of all languages
with which we all understand each other; I say, then, that in this way of
Language asked me what I was looking for in that garden, and whose was it.
I replied that I was a slave of Arnaúte Mamí (and this, because I knew
It is true that he was a great friend of his), and that he was looking for all herbs,
to make salad. He asked me, therefore, if I was a man of
rescue or not, and how much my master asked for me. Being in all these
questions and answers, came out of the garden house the beautiful Zoraida, the
which there was already a lot that I had seen; and, like blackberries in no way
gingerly show themselves to Christians, nor do they shy away
I have already said, he was not given anything to come where his father was with me;
before, then when her father saw that she was coming, and from space, he called her and sent
to arrive.
»It would be too much for me to say about the great beauty, the gentleness, the
gallant and rich adornment with which my dear Zoraida showed herself to my eyes:
I will only say that more pearls dangled from her most beautiful neck, ears and
hair, what hair he had on his head. In the throats of the sus
feet, which, uncovered, in his own way, brought, brought two quivers (which is
they called the manillas or anklets of the feet in Moorish) of pure gold,
with so many diamonds set, that she told me after her father
he estimated at ten thousand doubles, and those that he carried on the wrists of his hands
they were worth the same. The pearls were in great quantity and very good, because the
The greatest gala and bizarreness of the blackberries is to adorn themselves with rich pearls and pearls,
and thus, there are more pearls and pearls among the Moors than among all the others
nations; and Zoraida's father was reputed to have many and the best
that there were in Algiers, and also having more than two hundred thousand
Spaniards, of which she was a lady that is now mine. Yes with everything
This ornament could then be beautiful, or not, because of the relics that
have remained in so many jobs, one can conjecture what it must have been in the
prosperities. Because it is already known that the beauty of some women has
days and seasons, and requires accidents to diminish or increase; And it is
natural thing that the passions of the mind raise or lower it, since
most times they destroy it.
"I mean, in short, that then it arrived in every extreme seasoned and in everything
extremely beautiful, or, at least, it seemed to me to be the most beautiful
then I had seen; and with this, seeing the obligations in which I had
put, it seemed to me that I had in front of me a deity from heaven, coming to
the earth for my taste and for my remedy. Just as she arrived, she told her
father in his language as I was a captive of his friend Arnaúte Mamí, and that
I came to get salad. She took his hand, and in that mixture of tongues
What have I said? He asked me if I was a gentleman and what was the cause that I did not
rescued. I replied that it was already rescued, and that the price could
to see in what my master esteemed me, since he had given for me a thousand and
five hundred zoltanis. To which she replied: `` In truth, if you were
of my father, that I made him not give you two more, because
You Christians always lie when you say, and you become poor
for deceiving the Moors. '' '' It could well be that, ma'am, 'I replied,' but
In truth, I have treated her with my master, and I treat her and will treat her with
how many people are there in the world. '' '' And when are you leaving? '' Said Zoraida.
"Tomorrow, I think," I said, "because here is a ship from France
sailing tomorrow, and I plan to go on it. '' '' Isn't it better, 'replied Zoraida,
Wait for them to come from Spain, and go with them, not with those from
France, who are not your friends? '' '' No, I answered, but I do eat
There are news that a ship from Spain is coming, it is true, I still
I will wait, since it is more true to leave tomorrow; because I wish that
I have to see myself in my land, and with the people that I love well, it is so much
that he will not let me wait for another comfort, if it takes time, no matter how better it is. ''
'' You must be undoubtedly married in your land, 'said Zoraida,' and that's why
You want to go see your wife. '' "I am not," I replied, "married, but I have
given the word of getting married on getting there. '' And is the lady a beautiful
who gave it to him? '' said Zoraida. "She is so beautiful," I replied, "that for
It is expensive and to tell you the truth, it seems like a lot to you. '' Desto laughed very
really her father, and said: `` Gualá, Cristiano, that must be very beautiful
if she looks like my daughter, who is the most beautiful in all this kingdom. But,
take a good look at it, and you'll see how I tell you the truth. '' Serve us as interpreter at
more of these words and reasons Zoraida's father, as more ladino; that,
although she spoke the bastard language which, as I said, is used there, more
He declared his intention by signs rather than by words.
»Being in these and many other reasons, a Moor came running, and said,
with loud voices, who had jumped from the fences or walls of the garden
four Turks, and they were picking the fruit, although it was not ripe.
The old man was startled, and so did Zoraida, because he is common and almost
It is natural for the Moors to fear the Turks, especially the
soldiers, who are so insolent and have so much empire over the
Moors who are subject to them, who treat them worse than if they were slaves
his. I say, then, that her father said to Zoraida: `` Daughter, go home
and lock yourself up, while I'm going to talk to these dogs; and you, Christian,
look for your herbs, and leave in good time, and take Allah with good to your
Earth''. I bowed, and he went to find the Turks, leaving me alone
with Zoraida, who began to show signs of going where her father had
sent. But, hardly he concealed himself with the trees of the garden, when
Turning to me, her eyes filled with tears, she said: `` Ámexi,
Cristiano, Ámexi ''; which means: "Are you going, Christian, are you going?" I the
I replied: `` Ma'am, yes, but not in any way without you: the first jumá
awaits me, and do not be startled when you see us; that without a doubt we will go
to the land of Christians. ''
»I told her this in a way that she understood me very well at all
reasons that both of us go through; and, putting an arm around my neck, with
Fainted footsteps began to walk towards the house; and luck would have it, that
could be very bad if heaven did not order it otherwise, that, going
both in the manner and posture that I have told you, with one arm around the neck,
his father, who had already returned from making the Turks go, saw us as lucky and
way we were going, and we saw that he had seen us; but Zoraida,
warned and discreet, she did not want to remove her arm from my neck, before
more to me and put his head on my chest, bending his knees a little,
giving clear signals and signs that he was fainting, and I, anxiously, gave
understand that I was holding her against my will. His father came running
where we were, and, seeing his daughter in that way, asked her what
what had; but, as she did not answer him, her father said:
some that with the shock of the entrance of these dogs has
faint''. And, taking her out of mine, he brought her close to his chest; and she, giving a
sigh and still not dry eyes with tears, he said again: `` Ámexi,
Cristiano, Ámexi '': "Go, Christian, go." To which his father replied:
`` It does not matter, daughter, that the Christian leaves, that he has done no harm to you, and
the Turks are already gone. Do not be startled by anything, because there is none to
may give you grief, because, as I have already told you, the Turks, at my request,
They turned the way they entered. '' '' They, sir, startled her, like
you have said - I said to his father -; more, well, she says that I go away, not her
I want to give regret: stay in peace, and, with your license, I will return, yes
be necessary, for herbs to this garden; that, according to my master, in
None are better for salad than in it. '' '' All that
you would like to be able to return, "replied Agi Morato," that my daughter does not say this
because you or any of the Christians angered her, but rather, for saying that
the Turks to leave, he said you should go away, or because it was about time that
look for your herbs. ''
With this, I said goodbye to the point of both; and she, ripping the
soul, it seems, left with her father; and I, with the ailment of looking for the
herbs, I surrounded the garden very well and to my pleasure: I looked carefully at the entrances
and outings, and the strength of the house, and the comfort that could be offered
to facilitate all of our business. This done, I came and realized
how much had happened to the renegade and my companions; and I couldn't wait to
see me enjoy without shock the good that in the beautiful and beautiful Zoraida the
luck offered me.
"Anyway, time passed, and the day and time for us so
wanted; and, following all the order and it seems that, with discreet
consideration and long speech, many times we had given, we had the good
event we wanted; because on Friday that followed the day that I with
Zoraida I spoke in the garden, our renegade, at dusk, gave background with
the boat almost in front of where the most beautiful Zoraida was. Already the
Christians who were to row the oar were forewarned and hidden by
various parts of all those surroundings. Everyone was suspended and
jubilant, waiting for me, eager to attack with the vessel that
eyes had; because they did not know the renegade concert, but
they thought that by force of arms they had to have and win freedom,
taking the life of the Moors who were inside the boat.
"It happened, then, that, just as I showed myself and my companions, all the
other people in hiding who saw us came to us. This was
already in time that the city was already closed, and for all that campaign
no person seemed. As we were together, we doubted if it would be better to go
first for Zoraida, or surrender first to the Bagarine Moors who roamed the
rowing in the boat. And, being in this doubt, our
renegade telling us what we were stopping at, that it was time, and that
all his Moors were uncared for, and most of them sleeping. Let's tell him
what we noticed, and he said that what mattered most was to perform
first the vessel, which could be done with great ease and without danger
some, and then we could go to Zoraida. Look good to all what
he would say, and thus, without stopping further, making him the guide, we arrived at the vessel,
and, jumping inside first, he reached for a cutlass, and said in Moorish:
`` None of you move from here, if you don't want it to cost you
life''. Already, at this time, almost all the Christians had entered.
The Moors, who were of little spirit, seeing their
Arráez, they were shocked, and without any of them lay hands on
The weapons, which few or almost none had, were left, without speaking
word, handcuff the Christians, who with great alacrity
they did, threatening the Moors that if they raised the
voice, which would soon be put to death by the knife.
"This being done, half of our people guarding them, the
that we stayed, also making us the renegade the guide, we went to the garden
of Agi Morato, and good luck wished that, arriving to open the door,
it opened as easily as if it were not closed; and so, with great
stillness and silence, we arrived at the house without being sensed by anyone. There was the
beautiful Zoraida waiting for us at a window, and, just as people felt,
he asked in a low voice if we were Nizarani, as if saying or asking if
we were Christians. I answered yes, and to come down. When she
met, he did not stop a point, because, without answering me a word, he went down in a
Instantly, she opened the door and showed herself to everyone so beautifully and richly
dressed that I can't make it expensive. After I saw her, I took one
hand and I began to kiss her, and the renegade did the same, and my two
comrades; and the others, who did not know the case, did what they saw that
we did, it seemed only that we thanked him and
we recognized as the lady of our freedom. The renegade told him in tongue
Moorish if his father was in the garden. She answered yes and that
slept. `` Well, it will be necessary to wake up, '' replied the renegade, `` and
take him with us, and everything that has value this beautiful
garden. '' '' No, 'she said,' my father is not to be touched in any way, and
In this house there is nothing other than what I carry, which is so much, so good
there will be so that all of you will be rich and happy; and wait a bit and what
you will see. '' And, saying this, he went back in, saying that very quickly
would return; that we stay, without making any noise. I asked him
to the renegade what had happened to her, who told me, to whom I
I said that nothing should be done more than what Zoraida wanted;
which as it returned loaded with a chest full of gold shields,
so many, that he could barely support it, wanted the bad luck that his father
wake up in the meantime and feel the noise that was walking in the garden; and,
leaning out of the window, then he knew that all those who were in it were
Christians; and, giving out many great and outrageous voices, he began to say
in Arabic: '' Christians, Christians! Thieves, thieves! ''; for the
What cries we all saw ourselves put in great and fearful confusion.
But the renegade, seeing the danger we were in, and how much it
It was important to go out with that company before being felt, with great
haste, went up where Agi Morato was, and together with him were some
of us; that I did not dare to abandon Zoraida, that as she fainted
had dropped into my arms. In resolution, those who rose gave
such good skill that at one point they came down with Agi Morato, bringing him tied
his hands and put a handkerchief in his mouth, which did not let him speak
word, threatening that speaking it would cost him his life. When your
daughter saw him, covered her eyes for not seeing him, and her father was scared,
ignoring how much of his will had been placed in our hands. More,
then being more necessary the feet, with diligence and alacrity we
we put in the boat; that those who had remained in it were waiting for us,
fearful of some bad event of ours.
»It would barely be two hours after the night, when we were all in
the boat, in which Zoraida's father was stripped of the
hands and mouth cloth; but the renegade again told him not to speak
word, that they would take his life. He, seeing his daughter there, began to
sigh tenderly, and more when she saw that I closely held her
embraced, and that she without defending, complaining or avoiding, was staying;
but, with all this, he was silent, because they did not put into effect the many
threats made by the renegade. Seeing, then, Zoraida already in the boat,
and that we wanted to give the oars to the water, and seeing there his father and the
other Moors who were tied up, he told the renegade to tell me
would do the mercy of releasing those Moors and giving freedom to his father,
because before he would throw himself into the sea than to see in front of his eyes and because of
hers to take captive a father who had loved her so much. The renegade me
he said it; and I replied that I was very happy; but he answered no
It was convenient, because if they were left there they would then surname the earth and
they would uproot the city, and cause them to go out looking for them with some
light frigates, and seize land and sea from them, so that they
we could escape; that what could be done was to give them freedom in
reaching the first land of Christians. In this opinion we all come,
and Zoraida, who was noticed, with the causes that moved us to not
Doing what he wanted afterwards was also satisfied; and then with glee
silence and joyous diligence, each of our brave rowers took
his paddle, and we began, entrusting ourselves to God with all our hearts, to sail the
Around the islands of Mallorca, which is the closest land of Christians.
»But, because of the north wind blowing a bit and the sea being somewhat
plummeted, it was not possible to follow the defeat of Mallorca, and we were forced
let us go land to land around Oran, not without much regret
ours, because they were not discovered from Sargel's place, who on that coast
falls sixty miles from Algiers. And, likewise, we feared to find for that
place some galeot of those that ordinarily come with merchandise of
Tetouan, although each one by himself, and all together, we boasted that, if he
I found a galley of merchandise, as it were not one of those who walk in privateering,
that not only we would not get lost, but that we would take ship where with more
security we could finish our trip. Zoraida was going, while she
I was sailing, putting my head in my hands, for not seeing his father, and I felt
I was calling Lela Marién to help us.
'Well we would have sailed thirty miles, when it dawned, about three
harquebus shots diverted from land, all of which we saw deserted and without
no one to discover us; but, with all that, we left by dint of
arms going a little into the sea, which was already somewhat calmer; and,
having entered almost two leagues, God ordered him to go to barracks in
so much that we ate something, that the boat was well supplied, since those who
They said that it was not that time to take any rest, that they
those who did not row should feed, because they did not want to let go of the oars
hands in any way. He became anxious, and at this he began to blow a
long wind, which forced us to sail and put down the oar, and
straighten Oran, because it is not possible to make another trip. Everything was done
with great alacrity; And so, under sail, we sailed for more than eight miles
per hour, with no other fear than that of encountering a vessel that
of privateering was.
»We fed the Bagarine Moors, and the renegade consoled them
telling them how they were not captive, that on the first occasion they would give them
Liberty. The same was said to Zoraida's father, who replied:
`` Anything else I could hope and believe of your liberality and
good term, O Christians! but to give me freedom, do not take me for so
simple to imagine it; that you never put yourself in danger of
take it off me to return it so liberally, especially knowing who I am
I, and the interest that you can continue to give it to me; which interests, yes
You want to name it, from here I offer you everything you want
for me and for that unfortunate daughter of mine, or else, for her alone, which is the
greatest and best part of my soul. '' In saying this, he began to cry so
bitterly that he moved us all to compassion, and forced Zoraida to
look; which, seeing him cry, was so moved that he got up from my
feet and went to embrace his father, and, putting his face to his,
they both began to cry so tender that many of us who went there
we accompany in it. But when her father saw her decked out for a party and with
so many jewels on himself, he said to her in his tongue: `` What is this, daughter, that yesterday
in the evening, before this terrible misfortune befell us in which we
we see, I saw you with your ordinary and homemade dresses, and now, without you
had time to get dressed and without having given you some happy new
solenizalle with adorning and polishing you, I see you composed with the best
dresses that I knew and was able to give you when the most favorable luck was for us?
Answer me this, which has me more suspense and admired than the same
misfortune in which I find myself. ''
Everything that the Moor said to his daughter was declared to us by the renegade, and she
did not answer a word. But, when he saw to the side of the boat the
box where she used to keep her jewels, which he knew well
had left in Algiers, and not brought him to the garden, he was more confused, and
asked him how that chest had come into our hands, and what was it
that came inside. To which the renegade, without waiting for Zoraida to
answered, he replied: `` Do not tire yourself, sir, in asking Zoraida,
your daughter, so many things, because with one that I answer you I will satisfy you
all; And so, I want you to know that she is a Christian, and she is the one who has been
the file of our chains and the freedom of our captivity; she goes
here of her will, so happy, to what I imagine, to see herself in this
state, like that which comes out of darkness to light, from death to life
and from grief to glory. '' '' Is it true what he says, daughter? '' Said the
Moor. '' That's right, '' Zoraida replied. `` What, in effect, '' replied the old man,
you are a Christian, and the one who has put her father in the power of her
enemies? '' To which Zoraida replied: `` I am the one who is Christian, but
not the one that has put you at this point, because my desire never extended to
to leave you or to do you harm, but to do me good. '' '' And what good is the
What have you done to yourself, daughter? '' '' That, 'she answered,' you ask Lela
Marién, that she will know how to tell you better than not me. ''
'Scarcely had the Moor heard this, when, with incredible alacrity, he
threw himself headlong into the sea, where he would undoubtedly drown, if the
long, embarrassing dress she was wearing did not entertain him a bit about the
Water. Zoraida called out for them to get him out, and so we all went, and,
grabbing him by the almalafa, we get him half drowned and senseless, that
Zoraida received so much sorrow that, as if he were already dead, she made a
tender and painful crying. Let's turn him face down, he returned a lot of water, he returned
itself after two hours, in which, having changed the wind,
It was convenient for us to go back towards land, and make force of oars, so as not to attack
in her; but our good luck wanted us to reach a cove that is done
next to a small promontory or cape that  the Moors is called that of
La Cava Rumía, which in our language means The Bad Christian Woman;
and it is tradition among the Moors that the Cava is buried in that place,
for whom Spain was lost, because he digs in his tongue means woman
bad, and chews, Christian; and they still have a bad omen to get there to give
fund when the need forces them to do so, because they never give without it;
since for us it was not a bad woman's shelter, but a safe harbor of
our remedy, as the sea was altered.
"We put our sentries ashore, and we never left the oars of the
hand; We ate what the renegade had provided, and we pray to God now
Our Lady, with all our hearts, may she help and favor us to
may we happily end such a happy beginning. God ordered, to
Zoraida's supplication, as we cast her father and all the
other Moors who were bound there came, because their courage was not enough, nor
could suffer his soft entrails, see in front of his eyes tied to his
father and those of his land imprisoned. We promise to do it like this at the time
departure, as there was no danger of leaving them in that place, which was
deserted. Our prayers were not so vain that they were not heard from the
heaven; that, in our favor, then the wind returned, the sea calmed,
inviting us to become happy to continue our begun journey.
Seeing this, we unleashed the Moors, and one by one we put them on the ground,
what they were in awe of; but, arriving to disembark the father
of Zoraida, who was already in all his agreement, said: `` Why do you think,
Christians, that this bad female strikes you to give me freedom? Do you think
What is his pity on me? No, by the way, but he does it for him
an obstacle that my presence will give you when you want to put your bad
wishes; nor do you think that it has moved her to change religion, to understand that the
yours is ahead of ours, but knowing that in your land there is
use dishonesty more freely than ours. '' And, turning to
Zoraida, holding him and another Christian by both arms, because
some folly he did not do, he said to him: `` O infamous girl and ill-advised
girl! Where are you going, blind and foolish, in the power of these dogs,
natural enemies of ours? Damn the hour that I begot you, and
cursed be the gifts and delights in which I have raised you! '' But, seeing I
I had a term not to finish so quickly, I hurried to put her on the ground,
and from there, loudly, he continued in his curses and lamentations, praying to
Muhammad prayed to Allah to destroy us, confuse and finish us; and when,
for having sailed, we could not hear his words, we saw his works,
which were tearing out beards, pulling hair, and crawling through the
ground; but once he strained his voice in such a way that we could understand that
He said: '' Come back, beloved daughter, come back to earth, I forgive you everything;
gives these men that money, which is already theirs, and returns to console
this sad father of yours, who in this deserted sand will leave his life, if you
leave! '' All of which Zoraida heard, and all felt and cried, and did not
knew how to say to him or answer him a word, but rather: ''
Lela Marién, who has been the cause of my being a Christian, she comforts you
in your sadness. Allah knows well that I could not do other than what I have
fact, and that these Christians owe nothing to my will, for, although
I would like not to come with them and stay in my house, it was impossible for me,
according to the rush that my soul gave me to put into action this one that
she seems as good as you, beloved father, you judge her as bad. '' This said, to
time that neither her father heard her, nor we already saw him; and thus, consoling
I to Zoraida, we all attended to our trip, which facilitated the
own wind, in such a way that we certainly had to see another
day at dawn on the banks of Spain.
»But, as rarely, if ever, does pure and simple good come, without being
accompanied or followed by some evil that disturbs or startles him, wanted our
fortune, or perhaps the curses that the Moor had cast upon his daughter, which
they are always to be feared of whatever parent they are; wanted, I say, that
being already engulfed and being almost three hours into the night,
going with the sail stretched high low, the oars braked, because the
prosperous wind took us away from work if we needed them, with the light of
the moon, which was clearly shining, we saw near us a vessel
round, which, with all the sails set, bringing a little luffing to the
rudder, in front of us it crossed; and this so close, that it was us
forced to subside by not ramming him, and they, likewise, made force of
rudder to allow us to pass.
They had put themselves on board the ship to ask us who we were, and where
We were sailing, and where we came from; but, for asking us this in language
French, said our renegade: '' No one answered; because these, without
Without a doubt, they are French things, which they do in all clothes. '' For this
warning, no one answered a word; and, having spent a bit
ahead, the vessel was already leeward, suddenly they released two
artillery pieces, and, it seemed, both came with chains, because
with one they cut our tree in half, and found it and the candle in
the sea; and at the moment, firing another piece, came to hit the bullet in the middle of
our boat, so that he opened it all, without doing any other harm; but,
as we saw each other go deep, we all began with loud voices to
ask for help and beg those of the ship to welcome us, because we
we flooded. They abated then, and, throwing the skiff or boat into the sea,
up to twelve well-armed Frenchmen entered it, with their arquebuses and
ropes lit, and thus they arrived next to ours; and, seeing how few
we were and how the vessel was sinking, they picked us up, saying that, for having
used of the rudeness of not responding to them, that had happened to us.
Our renegade took the chest of Zoraida's riches, and found it in
the sea, without anyone seeing what he was doing. In resolution, all
we passed with the French, who, after having informed themselves of everything
what they wanted to know about us, as if they were our capitals
enemies, they stripped us of everything we had, and Zoraida
even the quivers on his feet. But it didn't give me so much
sorrow that they gave to Zoraida, as the fear that I had of
that they had to go from removing the most rich and precious jewels to the
remove from the jewel that was most valuable and she most esteemed. But the wishes of
Those people do not extend to more than money, and of this you never see
fed up with his greed; which then reached so much that even the
clothed as captives they will take away from us if they were of any use to them. And there was
seem among them that we were all thrown into the sea wrapped in a
sailing, because they intended to deal in some ports of Spain with
Name that they were Bretons, and if they took us alive, they would be punished,
being discovered his theft. But the captain, who was the one who had stripped
to my dear Zoraida, he said that he was content with the prey he had, and
that he did not want to touch any port in Spain, but to pass the Strait of
Gibraltar at night, or however he could, and go to Rochela, whence he had
stepped out; and thus, they agreed to give us the skiff of their ship, and all
what is necessary for the short navigation that we had left, as they did
another day, already in sight of the land of Spain, with which sight, all our
regrets and poverties we forgot all about, as if they had not
passed by us: so much is the joy of achieving lost freedom.
»It could be around noon when they threw us into the boat, giving us two
barrels of water and some cake; and the captain, moved I do not know what
Mercy, when the most beautiful Zoraida embarked, gave her up to forty
shields of gold, and did not allow his soldiers to take these same
dresses that you are now wearing. We entered the vessel; let's give them the
thank you for the good you did us, showing us more grateful than
complaining; they were made along, following the defeat of the strait;
us, without looking to another north than to the land that was shown to us
ahead, we were in such a hurry to row that at sunset we were so
close that we might well, in our opinion, get there before it was very
evening; but, for not seeming on that night the moon and the sky show themselves
dark, and for ignoring the place where we were, we did not think
safe to ram into the ground, as it seemed to many of us, saying
that we found in it, even if it were in some rocks and far from town, because
in this way we would ensure the fear that was due to reason that there
the ships of Tetouan were traveling, which night in Barbary
and they wake up on the shores of Spain, and they usually prey, and they
they go back to sleep at home. But, contrary to opinion, the one who
took was that we arrived little by little, and that if the calm of the sea
Grant, we disembarked where we could.
This was done, and just before midnight would be when we reached the foot of
a very warped and high mountain, not so close to the sea that it did not grant a
little space to be able to disembark comfortably. We rammed into the sand
we went ashore, we kissed the ground, and, with tears of very joy
happy, we all thanked God, Our Lord, for the good so
incomparable that he had made us. We took out of the boat the supplies that
I had it, let's throw it on the ground, and climb a long way up the mountain,
because we were still there, and we still couldn't secure the chest, or
We had just believed that it was the land of Christians that already supported us.
It dawned later, in my opinion, than we wanted. We just
climb the entire mountain, to see if from there a town was discovered, or
some shepherd's huts; but, although more we tended our eyes, nor
town, no person, no path, no way we discovered. With all this,
we determined to enter the land inland, for it could not be less but
Let us soon discover who gave us news of it. But what to me
I was most tired of seeing Zoraida go on foot because of those rough edges, which,
since I once put her on my shoulders, she was more tired of my
weariness that her repose rested her; and so he never wanted me that
work take; and, with a lot of patience and displays of joy, taking it myself
always hand in hand, just under a quarter of a league we should have
gone, when it reached our ears the sound of a small shearing, a sign
clear that nearby had won; and, looking at all carefully yes
Some of them looked like, we saw at the foot of a cork oak a young shepherd, who with
great repose and carelessness was carving a stick with a knife. We gave
voices, and he, raising his head, rose slightly to his feet, and,
Later we found out, the first that were offered to him were the
renegade and Zoraida, and, as he saw them in Moorish habit, he thought that all
those of the Barbary were on him; and, slipping with strange lightness through
the forest ahead, began to give the biggest cries in the world saying:
'' Moors, there are Moors on earth! Moors, Moors! Weapon, weapon! ''
"With these voices we were all confused, and we did not know what to do to ourselves; but,
Considering that the voices of the shepherd were to stir the earth, and that
the coastal cavalry had to come later to see what it was, we agreed
let the renegade strip off the Turk's clothes and put on a
gilecuelco or jacket of a captive that one of us gave him later, although he
was in shirt; and thus, entrusting ourselves to God, we went the same way
that we saw that the shepherd was carrying, always waiting when he would give
the coastal cavalry upon us. And we were not fooled by our
thought, because, not yet two hours would have passed when, having already
out of those weeds to a plain, we discovered up to fifty
gentlemen, who with great lightness, running at half rein, we
They were coming, and just as we saw them, we were waiting for them; but,
as they came and saw, instead of the Moors who sought, both
poor Christian, they were confused, and one of them asked us if we were
we perhaps the occasion why a shepherd had surnamed the weapon.
'' Yes, '' I said; and, wanting to begin to tell you my success, and from where
we were coming and who we were, one of the Christians who came with us
met the rider who had asked us the question, and said, without leaving me
say more word: `` Thanks be to God, gentlemen, that such a good
part has led us! Because, if I am not mistaken, the land we step on
is that of Vélez Málaga, if the years of my captivity have not taken me away from
the memory of reminding me that you, sir, who ask us who we are,
you are Pedro de Bustamante, my uncle. '' Scarcely had the Christian said this
captive, when the rider threw himself off the horse and came to embrace the groom,
saying to him: `` Nephew of my soul and my life, I already know you, and I have already
mourned for dead me, and my sister, your mother, and all of yours, who still
they live; and God has been served to give them life so that they enjoy the pleasure of
see you: we already knew you were in Algiers, and from the signs and
your dresses, and that of all this company, I understand that you have
had miraculous freedom. '' `` That's right, '' replied the waiter, `` and time we
It will be left to tell you everything. ''
"After the horsemen understood that we were captive Christians, they
They dismounted from their horses, and each one invited us with his own to
take us to the city of Vélez Málaga, which was a league and a half from there.
Some of them took the boat back to town, telling them where
we had left it; others got us on our haunches, and Zoraida went on the
of the Christian's uncle's horse. Come out to welcome all the people, that
Already from some who had advanced they knew the news of our coming. No
they were amazed to see free captives, nor captive Moors, because all the
people from that coast are made to see one and the other; but
they were amazed at the beauty of Zoraida, who at that moment and season
was at its point, I craved with the fatigue of the road as with the joy of
to see oneself already in the land of Christians, without being scared of getting lost; and this will
had brought such colors to his face that, if not that the fans then
He was deceiving me, I will dare to say that there was no more beautiful creature in the world; to
at least, that I had seen it.
»We went straight to the church, to give thanks to God for the mercy received;
And, just as Zoraida entered it, she said that there were faces that
they looked like Lela Marien's. Let us tell him that they were his images, and how
better the renegade could give him to understand what they meant, so that
she worshiped them as if they were truly each the same
Lela Marién who had spoken to her. She, who has a good understanding and a
natural easy and clear, he understood later how much about the images he
said. From there they took us and distributed us all in different houses of the
village; but the renegade, Zoraida and me were taken by the Christian who came
with us, and in the house of his parents, who were moderately well-off from
the goods of fortune, and they gifted us with as much love as their own son.
»Six days we were in Vélez, after which the renegade, made his
information on how much was convenient for him, he went to the city of Granada,
be reduced by means of the Holy Inquisition to the most holy guild of the
Church; The other freed Christians each went where they best
it seemed; Zoraida and I were left alone, with only the shields that courtesy
from the French gave Zoraida, of which I bought this animal in which she
comes; and, serving her until now as father and squire, and not as husband,
we go with the intention of seeing if my father is alive, or if one of my brothers
has had more prosperous fortune than mine, since, having done the
Zoraida's companion heaven, it seems to me that no other luck could
come, no matter how good it was, that he esteemed her more. The patience with which
Zoraida carries the discomforts that poverty brings with her, and the desire that
shows to have to see herself already Christian is so much and such, that she admires me and
moves to serve it all the time of my life, since the taste I have
to see me hers and that she is mine troubles me and undoes not knowing if
I will find in my land a corner where I can collect it, and if they have done the
time and death such a move in the farm and life of my father and brothers
that hardly anyone can find me, if they are missing. " I have no more, gentlemen,
what to tell you about my story; which, if it is pleasant and pilgrim, judge it
your good understandings; I know how to say that I would like to speak to you
counted more briefly, since the fear of angering you more than four
Circumstances has taken me off my tongue.
Chapter XLII. Which is about what most happened in the sale and others
many things worth knowing
In saying this, the captive fell silent, to whom Don Fernando said:
-By the way, Mr. Captain, the way you have counted this stranger
The event has been such that it equals the novelty and strangeness of the case itself.
Everything is strange and strange, and full of accidents that amaze and suspend
who hears them; and it is in such a way the taste that we have received in
listen to him, that, although he found us tomorrow entertained in the
Same story, let's hope it started again.
And, in saying this, Don Fernando and all the others offered themselves, with
everything to them possible to serve you, with words and reasons so loving
and so true that the captain was satisfied with his
wills. Especially, Don Fernando offered him that if he wanted to become
with him, that he would make the marquis, his brother, be godfather of baptism
of Zoraida, and that he, for his part, would accommodate him so that he could
enter his land with the authority and comfort that was due to him.
The captive thanked the captive for everything, but did not want to accept any
of his liberal offerings.
In this, the night was already coming, and, when it closed, a
car, with some men on horseback. They asked for an inn; here in the
landlord replied that there was not an unoccupied inch in the entire sale.
`` Well, even if it is, '' said one of the horsemen who had entered,
it must be missing for the lord hearer who comes here.
At this name the guespeda was troubled, and said:
-Sir, what is in it is that I have no beds: if your mercy of the
Mr. Hearer brings it, that you must bring it, come in good time, that I and my
husband, we will leave our room to accommodate at his mercy.
"Be in good time," said the squire.
But, at this time, a man had already got out of the car, who in the suit
Then he showed the office and position he had, because the clothes are long, with the
ruffled sleeves, which he wore, proved to be a hearer, as his servant had
saying. He was holding a maid by the hand, apparently up to sixteen
years, dressed on the way, so bizarre, so beautiful and so gallant that
everyone admired his sight; so that, not having seen
Dorotea and Luscinda and Zoraida, who were at the sale, would think that another
such beauty as this maiden could hardly be found. Was found
Don Quixote, upon entering the hearer and the maiden, and, just as he saw him, said:
-Surely your grace can enter and spread out in this castle,
that, although it is narrow and poorly accommodated, there is no tightness or discomfort
in the world that does not give place to weapons and letters, and more if weapons
and letters bring as a guide and champion to the beauty, as the letters bring it
of your mercy in this beautiful maiden, to whom they must not only open and
the castles to manifest, but to move aside the cliffs, and
to lower the mountains, to give welcome. Among your mercy, I say, in
this paradise, that here will find stars and suns that accompany the sky that
your mercy brings with it; here you will find the weapons at their point and the
beauty in its core.
The hearer of Don Quixote's reasoning remained astonished, and he began to
look very purposefully, and he admired her size no less than her words;
and, without finding any with which to respond, he turned to admire again
when he saw Luscinda, Dorotea and Zoraida before him, who, to the new
of the new güéspedes and to which the innkeeper had given them
beauty of the maiden, they had come to see and receive her. But don
Fernando, Cardenio and the priest made him flatter and more courtly
offerings. Indeed, the oidor entered confused, from what he saw
as of what I heard, and the beautiful ones of the sale gave the welcome
to the beautiful maiden.
In resolution, well the hearer saw that they were leading people all
that it was there; but Don Quixote's size, visage and good looks
misled; and, having passed among all courteous offers and
feeling the convenience of the sale, ordered what was previously ordered:
that all the women entered the aforementioned chamber, and that the
men to stay outside, as in his guard. And so, the listener was happy
that her daughter, who was the maid, should go with those ladies, which
she did very willingly. And with part of the innkeeper's narrow bed, and
with half of the one the hearer brought, they settled that night better than
what they thought.
The captive, who, from the point he saw the hearer, his heart leaped
and suspecting that this was his brother, he asked one of the servants who
with him they came what his name was and if he knew what land he was from. The servant
He replied that his name was Juan Pérez de Viedma, and that he had
Heard it was from a place in the mountains of León. With this relationship and
with what he had seen it was confirmed that this was his
brother, who had followed the letters on the advice of his father; and,
excited and happy, calling aside Don Fernando, Cardenio, and
priest, he told them what was happening, certifying that that listener was his
brother. The servant had also told him how he was provided by the hearer at
Indias, at the Audiencia of Mexico. He also knew how that maiden was
his daughter, from whose birth his mother had died, and that he had been
rich with the dowry that he stayed at home with his daughter. Asked them for advice what
would have to discover himself, or to know first if, after
discovered, his brother, seeing him poor, was insulting or receiving him with
good guts.
"Let me have that experience," said the priest; the more, no
it is necessary to think but that you, sir captain, will be very well received; because the
courage and prudence that your brother discovers in his good opinion does not
indications of being arrogant or unknown, nor that he does not know how to put the
cases of fortune at their point.
`` With all that, '' said the captain, `` I would like, not suddenly, but for
rodeos, let me know.
`` I tell you, '' replied the priest, `` that I will trace it so that all
we are satisfied.
Already, in this, the dinner was seasoned, and everyone sat at the table, eceto
the captive and the ladies, who dined themselves in his room. In the middle
of the dinner the priest said:
"By the very name of your worship, senor oidor, I had a comrade in
Costantinopla, where I was a captive for some years; which comrade was one
of the brave soldiers and captains that were in all the infantry
Spanish, but as much as he was brave and brave he was of
unhappy.
"And what was that captain's name, my lord?" asked the hearer.
"His name was," answered the priest, "Ruy Pérez de Viedma, and he was a native of a
place in the mountains of León, which told me a case that his father
with his brothers had happened to him that, not to tell me a man so
true like him, I had him as the advice of those that the old
they count the winter to the fire. Because he told me that his father had divided his
property between three children he had, and had given them certain advice,
better than Cato's. And I know I say that the one he chose to come to the
The war had succeeded him so well that in a few years, for his courage and
effort, with no other arm than that of his great virtue, rose to be captain of
infantry, and to see himself on the way and predicament of being a swift master of
countryside. But it was the opposite fortune, because where he could wait and
have good, there he lost it, with losing freedom in the most happy
day where so many collected it, which was in the battle of Lepanto. I the
I lost in the Goleta, and later, by different events, we found ourselves
comrades in Costantinopla. From there he came to Algiers, where I know he
One of the strangest cases that have ever happened in the world happened.
From here the priest went on, and, with succinct brevity, recounted what with
Zoraida her brother had happened; to which he was so attentive
hearer, who had never been so hearer as then. Only the
cure to the point when the French stripped the Christians that in the
boat came, and the poverty and need in which his comrade and the beautiful Moorish
Had remained; of which he had not known where they had stopped, nor if
they had come to Spain, or the French had brought them to France.
Everything the priest said he was listening to, something deviated from there, the
captain, and he noticed every move his brother made; which,
seeing that the priest had already reached the end of his story, giving a big
sighed and filling his eyes with water, said:
-Oh, sir, if you only knew the news that you have told me, and how I
they play so partly that it is forced me to give samples of it with these tears
that, against all my discretion and modesty, they come out of my eyes! That captain
so brave you say is my older brother, who, as stronger and more
higher thoughts than me nor any other younger brother of mine, chose the honorable
and worthy exercise of war, which was one of the three paths that our
Father proposed to us, according to what your comrade told you in the council that,
your opinion, you heard him. I followed the one with the letters, in which God and
my diligence have put me in the degree that you see me. My younger brother is
in Pirú, so rich that with what he has sent to my father and me he has
well satisfied the part that he took, and even given to the hands of my
father with which to satisfy his natural liberality; and I, anxiously, have
been able with more decency and authority to treat me in my studies and reach the
position in which I see myself. My father still lives, dying with the desire to know about
his eldest son, and asks God with continuous prayers not to close death
his eyes until he sees his son's alive; of which I marvel,
being so discreet, how in so many works and afflictions, or prosperous
events, has neglected to give notice of himself to his father; what if he
knew, or any of us, had no need to wait for the miracle
of the cane to reach his rescue. But what I now fear is
think if those French have given him freedom, or have they died
for covering up his theft. This will all be that I continue my journey, not with that
happy with that I started, but with all melancholy and sadness. Oh good
my brother, and who knew now where you were; that I went to look for you
and to get rid of your jobs, even if it were at the expense of mine! Oh who
bring news to our old father that you had life, even if you were
in the most hidden dungeons of Barbary; that their
riches, my brother's and mine! Oh beautiful and liberal Zoraida,
who could pay for the good that you did to a brother !; who could
find yourself at the rebirth of your soul, and at weddings, which we all like so much
give!
These and other similar words said the hearer, full of so much compassion
with the news that his brother had given him, that all who heard him
they accompanied him in showing the feeling they had of his pity.
Seeing, then, the priest how well he had gone with his intention and with what
that the captain wanted, he did not want to keep them all sad any longer, and
thus, he got up from the table, and, entering where Zoraida was, took her by
her hand, and after her came Luscinda, Dorotea, and the hearer's daughter.
The captain was waiting to see what the priest wanted to do, which was that,
taking him also by the other hand, with both of them he went where
The hearer and the other gentlemen were there, and he said:
-Cesen, lord hearer, your tears, and your wish of all the
It is well that I will be right to wish each other, because you have before your good brother and
to your good sister-in-law. This one you see here is Captain Viedma, and this one, the
beautiful blackberry that did him so much good. The French that I told you put them
in the narrowness that you see, so that you show the liberality of your
good chest.
The captain came to embrace his brother, and he put both hands on his
breasts from looking at him a little further away; But when he finished meeting him,
hugged so tightly, shedding such tender tears of contentment, that
most of those who were present had to accompany him in them. The
words that both brothers said to each other, the feelings they showed,
I hardly think they can be thought, the more they can be written. There, in brief
reasons, they realized their events; there they showed putting in their point
the good friendship of two brothers; there the hearer embraced Zoraida; there the
offered his property; there she made her daughter embrace her; there the christian
beautiful and the most beautiful blackberry renewed everyone's tears.
There Don Quixote was attentive, without speaking a word, considering these so
strange events, attributing them all to chimeras of the errant cavalry.
There they arranged for the captain and Zoraida to return with their brother to
Seville and notify their father of their discovery and freedom, so that, as
could, come to be found at the wedding and baptism of Zoraida, for not
make it possible for the hearer to leave the path he was leading, because of having new
that a month from there the fleet would depart from Seville to New Spain, and
It was very uncomfortable for him to miss the trip.
In resolution, everyone was happy and glad of the good success of the
captive; and, as the night was almost in the two parts of his day,
They agreed to gather up and rest what was left of it. Don Quixote
offered to guard the castle, because of some giant or other evil
errant mess were not rushed, greedy for the great treasure of
beauty that was enclosed in that castle. Those who
They knew, and gave the hearer an account of Don Quixote's strange humor, that
no little taste received.
Only Sancho Panza despaired of the delay in recollection, and only
he settled down better than all, leaning on his donkey's rigging,
that they cost as expensive as it will be said later.
Thus, the ladies gathered in their room, and the rest settling down as
Luckily they could, Don Quixote went out of the sale to do the
Castle sentinel, as promised.
It came to pass, then, that with the dawn shortly to come, it reached the ears of
the ladies with a voice so intoned and so good, that it forced them all to
listen attentively, especially Dorothea, who was awake, to whose
Dona Clara de Viedma slept on the other side, who was called the listener's daughter.
No one could imagine who the person who sang so well was, and it was a
voice alone, without any instrument accompanying it. Sometimes it seemed to them
who sang in the courtyard; others, that in the stable; and, being in this
Very attentive confusion, he came to the door of the Cardenio room and said:
-Who does not sleep, listen; that they will hear a voice of a mule handler, who
such a way he sings that he enchants.
"We heard it, sir," answered Dorotea.
And with this, Cardenio left; and Dorotea, paying as much attention as possible,
understood that what was sung was this:
Chapter XLIII. Where the pleasant story of the mule boy is told,
with other strange events in the sale happened]
-I am a sailor of love,
and in its deep sea
I sail without hope
to arrive at any port.
Following I go to a star
that from afar I discover,
more beautiful and resplendent
How many did Palinuro see?
I don't know where it leads me
and so I navigate confused,
the soul to look at her attentively,
careful and careless.
Impertinent remarks,
honesty against use,
they are clouds that cover it up for me
When else I try to see her.
Oh clear and shining star,
in whose fire I hurry !;
to the point that you cover up for me,
it will be my death the point.
When the one who sang reached this point, it seemed to Dorotea that it would not be
It is good that Clara stopped hearing such a good voice; and thus, moving it to one already
another part, woke her up saying:
-Forgive me, girl, that I wake you up, because I do it because you like to hear the
best voice you may have heard in your entire life.
Clara woke up all sleepy, and the first time she did not understand what
Dorotea said to him; and, asking him again, she told him again,
for which Clara was attentive. But, he had barely heard two verses that the
who was singing was continuing, when a tremor so strange took him as if
of some serious accident of quartan was ill, and, embracing
closely with Teodora, he said:
-Oh lady of my soul and my life! Why did you wake me up? that he
The greatest good fortune could do for me for now was to have my
eyes and ears, so as not to see or hear that unfortunate musician.
-What are you saying, girl ?; look what they say that the one who sings is a waiter
mules.
`` He is but the lord of places, '' Clara answered, `` and the one who has him in my
soul with such certainty that if he does not want to leave it, it will not be taken away
eternally.
Dorothea was amazed at the girl's heartfelt reasons, seeming to her
that they far outstripped the discretion that their few years promised; and
thus, he said:
-You speak in a way, Mrs. Clara, that I cannot understand you: declare yourselves more and
tell me what you say about soul and places, and this musician, whose voice
so restless it has you. But don't tell me anything for now, I don't want to
lose, by going to your shock, the pleasure I receive from hearing
sings; It seems to me that with new verses and a new tone he returns to his singing.
"Be in good time," Clara answered.
And, not to hear him, he covered both ears with his hands,
Dorotea wondered; which, being attentive to what was being sung, saw that
they continued in this way:
-Sweet hope of mine,
that, breaking impossible and weeds,
you follow the path
that you pretend and dress yourself:
do not faint to see you
at every step next to your death.
They do not reach lazy
honored triumphs or any victory,
nor can they be happy
those who, not in contrast to fortune,
surrender, helpless,
to soft leisure all the senses.
That love his glories sell
faces, it's a big reason, and it's fair treatment,
Well, there is no richer garment
than the one that takes off for your taste;
and it is manifest
that it is not of esteem what little costs.
Loving stubbornness
perhaps they achieve impossible things;
and there, although with mine
I follow the most difficult of love,
that's not why I'm suspicious
of not reaching heaven from earth.
Here the voice ended, and Clara began to sob again. All of which
ignited the desire of Dorotea, who wanted to know the cause of so soft singing
and I cry so sad. And so, he asked him again what it was that
he meant denantes. Then Clara, afraid that Luscinda would not
heard, hugging Dorotea closely, put her mouth so close to her ear
Dorotea, who could surely speak without being of another sense, and thus
said:
-This one who sings, my lady, is a son of a natural knight of the kingdom
of Aragon, lord of two places, who lived in front of my house
father in court; and, although my father had the windows of his house with
canvases in the winter and lattices in the summer, I don't know what it was, nor
no, that this gentleman, who was walking to the study, saw me, nor do I know if
church or elsewhere. Finally, he fell in love with me, and gave it to me
understand from the windows of his house with so many signs and with so many
tears, which I had to believe, and even want, without knowing what
wanted. Among the signs he made me was one of joining a hand with
the other, giving me to understand that he would marry me; and, although I
I would be very happy if I was there, as alone and without a mother, I did not know with whom
communicate it, and so, I let him be without giving him another favor if it was not, when
my father was away from home and his was too, raise the canvas a little or
the lattice and let me see everything, of what he made so much of a party, that he gave
signs of going crazy. The time came for my departure
father, which he knew, and not from me, because I could never tell him. He fell bad, to
what I understand, of regret; and so, the day that we never split
I could see him to say goodbye to him, even with my eyes. But after two
days that we walked, when entering an inn, in a place a day of
here, I saw him at the door of the inn, in the habit of a mule-handler, so
to the natural that if I did not take him so portrayed in my soul it would be impossible
meet her. I met him, I admired me and I was happy; he looked at me stealing from my father,
from whom he always hides when he crosses in front of me in the
roads and inns where we arrive; and, as I know who it is, and I consider
that for love of me comes on foot and with so much work, dying of grief,
and where he puts his feet I put my eyes. I do not know with what intention it comes,
nor how he has been able to escape from his father, who loves him extraordinarily,
because he has no other heir, and because he deserves it, as your
Thank you when I see him. And more I know how to say: that everything that he sings he brings out
of his head; I have heard that he is a very great student and poet. And there is
more: that every time I see him or hear him sing, I tremble all over the place and
startled, fearful that my father will meet him and come to know
our wishes. In my life I have spoken a word to him, and with all that,
I want it so that I won't be able to live without it. This is, my lady, everything
what I can tell you about this musician, whose voice has pleased you so much; what in
She alone will be good to see that she is not a mule handler, as you say, but
lord of souls and places, as I have told you.
"Say no more, Senora Dona Clara," said Dorotea at this time, and this,
kissing her a thousand times-; Say no more, I say, and wait for the new one to come
day, that I hope in God to direct your business in a way, that
have the happy end that such honest principles deserve.
-Oh ma'am! said Dona Clara, "what end can be expected, if your father is
so main and so rich that it will seem to you that even I cannot be a servant of
his son, how much more wife? Well, marry me to steal my father, I will not
because there is in the world. I would only want this waiter to turn around and
leave; maybe with not sailing and with the great distance of the road that we take
The grief that I now carry would be alleviated, although I know how to say that this remedy
that I imagine has to take advantage of me very little. I don't know what the hell it was
this, nor where has this love that I have entered, being I so
a girl and he so young, that in truth I think we are of an age
same, and that I am not yet sixteen years old; that for Saint's day
Miguel who will come says my father that I fulfill them.
Dorotea could not stop laughing, hearing how much a child Dona Clara spoke,
to whom he said:
-Let's rest, madam, what little I think remains of the night, and God will dawn and
We will thrive, or my hands will go badly.
They settled down with this, and there was a great silence throughout the sale;
only the innkeeper's daughter and Maritornes, her maid, the
which, as they already knew the humor in which Don Quixote was sinning, and that he was
outside the sale armed and on horseback doing the guard, they determined the
two of making a joke, or, at least, of spending a bit of time
hearing his nonsense.
It is, therefore, the case that in all the sale there was no window that went out to the
field, but a hole in a haystack, through which they threw the straw outside.
The two semidoncellas were placed in this hole, and they saw that Don Quixote
was on horseback, leaning on his sandeel, occasionally giving so
mourning and deep sighs that seemed, that with each one
it ripped out the soul. And they also heard him say in a soft voice, gifted and
loving:
-O my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, end of all beauty, end and finish
of discretion, file of the best grace, deposit of honesty, and,
Ultimately, the idea of ​​all that is profitable, honest, and delightful in
the world! And what will your mercy do? If you have by chance the
You lie in your captive knight, who to so many dangers, just to serve you,
of your will you wanted to get? Give me new della, oh luminary of
the three faces! Perhaps with envy of hers you are now looking at her; what, or
strolling through a gallery of its sumptuous palaces, or already
breasts on some balcony, is considering how, save your honesty and
greatness, it has to tame the storm that my careful heart is for it
suffers, what glory he has to give to my sorrows, what calm to my care and,
finally, what a life to my death and what a reward for my services. And you sun
that you must already be in a hurry saddling your horses, to get up early and go out
to see my lady, just as you see her, I beg you to greet her on my part;
but beware that when you see her and greet her, you do not give her face peace,
I will be more jealous of you than you were of that slight ungrateful that
so much made you sweat and run across the plains of Thessaly, or along the banks
of Peneo, that I do not remember well where you ran then jealous and
in love.
Don Quixote then arrived at this point in his so mournful
reasoning, when the innkeeper's daughter began to lisp him
tell him:
-My Lord, may your mercy come here if it is served.
To whose signs and voice Don Quixote turned his head, and saw, in the light of
moon, which was then in all its clarity, what they called it from the hole
that seemed to him a window, and even with golden bars, as it should be
have as rich castles as he imagined that sale was; and
then instantly he was pictured in his crazy imagination that again,
like the past, the beautiful maiden, daughter of the lady of that castle,
defeated by his love, she asked him again; and with this thought, why not
being rude and ungrateful, he turned the reins to Rocinante and
He came to the hole, and, just as he saw the two girls, he said:
-I have a pity for you, beautiful lady, that you have put your love
you lie in part where it is not possible to correspond as your
great value and kindness; of what you should not blame this miserable
errant knight, to whom he has love unable to give his
will to other than that which, at the point that his eyes saw it, the
made absolute mistress of his soul. Forgive me, good lady, and gather yourselves in
your room, and do not want, with your desires signifying me more, than
I show myself more ungrateful; And if you find me in the love you have in me
another thing with which to satisfy you, that love itself is not, ask me; that I
I swear to you, by that absent sweet enemy of mine, to give it to you on the continent,
although you asked me for a loaf of Medusa's hair, which was all
snakes, or the same rays of the sun enclosed in a flask.
"You do not need anything else, my lady, sir," he said at this point.
Maritornes.
"Well, what do you need, discreet mistress, your mistress?" -replied don
Quixote.
"Only one of your beautiful hands," said Maritornes, "for being able to
with her the great desire that has brought her to this hole, so in danger of her
honor that if his lord father had felt it, the slightest slice of it would be
ear.
-I would like to see that! Don Quixote answered; but he will keep well
Deso, if you no longer want to make the most disastrous end that father did in the
world, for having laid hands on the delicate limbs of his lover
daughter.
It seemed to Maritornes that without a doubt Don Quixote would give the hand that had been
asked, and, proposing in his thought what to do, he got off the
hole and went to the stable, where he took the halter of the donkey of
Sancho Panza, and with great alacrity he returned to his hole, in time that Don
Quixote had gotten to his feet on Rocinante's chair, reaching for
the barred window, where the fervent maiden imagined herself to be; and, to
shake hands, said:
Take, madam, that hand, or, to put it better, that executioner of the
evildoers of the world; take that hand, I say, who has not been touched by another of
any woman, not even the one who has full possession of all my
body. I do not give it to you to kiss it, but to look at the contest
of his nerves, the interlocking of his muscles, the width and spaciousness of
your veins; Where will you get what should be the strength of the arm that
such a hand has.
"Now we'll see," said Maritornes.
And, making a slip tie to the halter, she put it around her wrist, and,
stepping down from the hole, he tied what was left to the bolt of the barn door
very strongly. Don Quixote, who felt the roughness of the string in his
doll said:
- It seems that your grace grates me rather than that he gives me his hand; not the
you treat so badly, because she is not to blame for the evil that my will
It does, nor is it good that in so little part you avenge the whole of your anger.
See that whoever wants well does not come so badly.
But all these reasons of Don Quixote were no longer heard by anyone, because,
just as Maritornes tied him up, she and the other left, dying of laughter, and
they were held in such a way that it was impossible to get loose.
He was, then, as has been said, standing on Rocinante, stuck all the
arm through the hole and tied at the wrist, and to the latch of the door, with
great fear and care, that if Rocinante deviated to a cape or
another was to be hung by the arm; and thus, I did not dare to move
some, since from the patience and stillness of Rocinante one could well
to hope that it would be without moving a whole century.
In resolution, Don Quixote seeing himself tied, and that the ladies had already
gone, he gave himself to imagine that all this was done by way of enchantment,
like last time, when in that very castle that Moor ground him
delighted with the muleteer; and cursed among themselves their little discretion and speech,
for, having gone so badly out of that castle the first time, it had
ventured into it the second time, being warned by gentlemen
walkers who, when they've tried an adventure and it didn't go well with it, it's
a sign that is not kept for them, but for others; and so they don't have
need to try it second time. With all this, he was pulling his arm, for
see if it could be released; but he was so well attached, that all his tests
they were in vain. It is true that he was pulling carefully, because Rocinante did not
moved; and even though he wanted to sit down and get in the chair, he couldn't
but to stand, or tear off your hand.
There was the desire of the sword of Amadis, against whom he had no force of
any enchantment; there was the cursing of his fortune; there was the
to exaggerate the lack of his presence in the world as long as he is there
he was delighted, which without a doubt he had believed that he was;
there he remembered again his beloved Dulcinea del Toboso; there was the
call his good squire Sancho Panza, who, buried in sleep and lying
on the saddlebag of his donkey, he did not remember at that moment the
mother who had given birth to him; there he called the wise men Lirgandeo and Alquife, who
help him; there he invoked his good friend Urganda, to help him, and,
finally, there the morning took him, so desperate and confused that he bellowed
like a bull; because he did not expect that with the day his trouble would be remedied,
because he considered it eternal, considering himself enchanted. And made him believe this
see that Rocinante moved little and not much, and he believed that by that luck,
without eating or drinking or sleeping, he and his horse were to be there, until
that bad influence of the stars passed away, or until another wiser
lovely will disenchant you.
But he was very much deluded in his belief, because, just began to dawn,
when four men on horseback arrived at the sale, very well placed and
seasoned, with their shotguns on the pommel. There was a knock on the door of the
sale, which was still closed, with great blows; which, seen by don
Quixote from where he still did not stop doing the sentry, with an arrogant voice
and high said:
-Knight, or squires, or whoever you are: you have no reason
knock on the doors of this castle; how clear it is that such
hours, or those who are inside sleep, or they do not have the habit of opening
the fortresses until the sun is spread all over the ground. Deviate
outside, and wait for the day to brighten, and then we'll see if it's fair or not
that they open to you.
`` What the hell of a fortress or castle is this, '' said one, `` to force us to
save those ceremonies? If you are the innkeeper, order that they open us, that
we are walkers who do not want to give barley to our horses anymore
and move on, because we are in a hurry.
-Paréceos, gentlemen, that I have the size of innkeeper? -replied don
Quixote.
"I don't know what size you are," replied the other, "but I know you say
nonsense in calling this sale a castle.
`` Castillo is, '' replied Don Quixote, `` and even one of the best in all this
Province; and people have inside who have had a scepter in their hand and a crown in
head.
`` It was better the other way around, '' said the walker, `` the scepter on the head and the
crown in hand. And it will be, if it comes to hand, that it must be inside some
company of representatives, of which it is often to have such crowns and
scepters that you say, because in such a small sale, and where so much
silence like this, I do not believe that people worthy of crown and
scepter.
`` You know little about the world, '' replied Don Quixote, `` because you ignore the cases that
they usually happen in the errant cavalry.
The companions who with the questioner came from the colloquium that
He passed with Don Quixote, and so they called again with great fury; and it was from
So the innkeeper woke up, and even all those who were in the sale were; and
thus, he got up to ask who was calling. It happened at this time that a
of the mounts in which the four who called came, it was gotten to smell
Rocinante, who, melancholic and sad, with drooping ears, held without
move to your uptight lord; and since, well, it was meat, although it seemed
of wood, could not stop resenting and go back to smell who came to
To caress; and thus, it had not moved as much as, when they deviated
Don Quixote's feet together, and, slipping from his chair, they came upon him
the floor, not to hang by the arm: something that caused him so much pain that
he believed either that his wrist was being cut off, or that his arm was being torn off; because
he was so close to the ground that with the tips of his feet
kissed the earth, which was to his detriment, because, as he felt how little
he lacked to put the plants on the ground, he tired and stretched
as much as I could to reach the ground: well as well as those who are in the
torment of the garrucha, put to touch, not touch, that they themselves are
cause of increasing their pain, with the effort they put into stretching,
deluded by the hope that is represented to them, that with little more than
stretch they will reach the ground.
Chapter XLIV. Where the unprecedented events of the sale continue
Indeed, there were so many voices that Don Quixote gave that, opening
I lent the doors of the sale, the innkeeper came out, terrified, to see who
He gave such shouts, and those outside did the same. Maritornes,
who had already awakened to the same voices, imagining what could be,
he went to the hayloft and untied, without anyone seeing him, the halter that don
Quixote was holding, and he then hit the ground, in view of the innkeeper and the
walkers, who, coming to him, asked him what he had, that such voices
gave. He, without answering a word, removed the string from his wrist, and,
rising to his feet, he climbed over Rocinante, embraced his shield, raised his
sandeel, and, taking a good part of the field, returned to canter, saying:
-Anyone who says that I have been justly enchanted, like my
Mrs. Princess Micomicona give me permission to do so, I deny you,
I challenge and challenge a singular battle.
The new travelers were amazed at the words of Don Quixote,
but the innkeeper took them away from that admiration, telling them that it was a gift
Quixote, and that it was not necessary to pay attention to him, because he was out of judgment.
They asked the landlord if a boy had come to that sale
up to the age of fifteen, who came dressed as a mule handler, from
such and such signs, giving the same signs that Dona Clara's lover brought. The
landlord replied that there were so many people at the sale, that he had not missed
see where they asked. But, having seen one of them the car where
the hearer had come, said:
-Here it must be without a doubt, because this is the car that he says that
follow; let one of us stay at the door and the others come in to look for him; and
It would still be good for one of us to surround the entire sale, because I don't know
It was through the fences of the corrals.
"It will be done," replied one of them.
And, entering the two inside, one stayed at the door and the other went to
surround the sale; all of which the innkeeper saw, and he did not know what for
those errands were carried out, since he well believed that they were looking for that
waiter whose address they had given him.
Already at this time the day was brightening; and, as well for this as for the noise that don
Quixote had done, they were all awake and got up,
especially Dona Clara and Dorotea, who one with a shock at having so
close to her lover, and the other with the desire to see him, they had been able to sleep
good bad that night. Don Quixote, who saw that none of the four
walkers paid attention to him, nor did they respond to his demand, he died and raged
of spite and fury; and if he found in the ordinances of his knighthood that
could lawfully the knight-errant take and undertake another undertaking,
having given his word and faith not to put himself in any until finishing the one
promised, he would charge them all, and make them answer badly for his
degree. But, because it seems to him not to be convenient or to be good to start a new
company until Micomicona was placed in his kingdom, he had to shut up and remain
I stayed, waiting to see what the proceedings of those
hikers; one of whom found the young man he was looking for, sleeping
side of a mule handler, well neglected that no one was looking for him, or
unless I found him. The man caught his arm and said:
-By the way, Mr. Don Luis, who responds well to who you are the habit
that you have, and that the bed in which I find you says well to the gift with which
your mother raised you.
The waiter wiped his sleepy eyes and looked from space to the one who had him
seized, and later learned that he was his father's servant, that he received such
startled, who did not hit or could not speak a word for a good space. AND
the servant continued saying:
-Here you don't have to do anything else, Senor Don Luis, but pay patience and
to go around the house, if your mercy does not like that your father and my lord
give it to the other world, because nothing else can be expected of grief with
that remains for your absence.
"Well, how did my father know," said Don Luis, "that I was coming this way and
this suit?
`` A student, '' replied the servant, `` to whom you gave an account of your
thoughts was the one who discovered it, moved by pity of those who saw that
did your father to the point that he missed you; and so he dispatched four
of his servants in search of you, and we are all here at your service,
happier than you can imagine, for the good office with which
we will return, taking you to the eyes that love you so much.
-That will be as I want, or as heaven orders it -answered Don
Lewis.
What are you to want, or what is heaven to order, apart from consenting to
come back ?; because nothing else should be possible.
All these reasons that passed between the two heard the mule handler next to
who was don Luis; and, getting up from there, he went to say what was happening to
Don Fernando and Cardenio, and the others, who had already dressed; to the
which he said how that man called that boy a gift, and the
reasons that happened, and how he wanted to return to his father's house, and the waiter
I did not want to. And with this, and with what they knew about the good voice that heaven
had given him, they all came with a great desire to know more particularly
who he was, and even to help him if they wanted to do something to him; and so I know
They went to the part where he was still talking and stubborn with his servant.
Dorotea would come out of her room at this, and after her Dona Clara, all troubled;
and, calling Dorotea Cardenio aside, she told him in brief reasons the
history of the musician and of Dona Clara, to whom he also told what was happening
of his father's servants coming to fetch him, and he did not tell him so
keeping quiet that Clara stopped hearing him; of what was so out of his mind that,
if Dorotea did not have it, she would find her on the ground. Cardenio told
Dorothea to return to the room, which he would try to remedy in
everything, and they did.
All four of them who came to look for Don Luis were already there inside the
sale and surrounded by him, persuading him that later, without stopping a point,
come back to comfort his father. He replied that in no way could he
to do until the end of a business in which his life, honor and soul were going.
Then the servants squeezed him, saying that they would not return
without him, and that they would take him, whether he wanted to or not.
"You will not do that," replied Don Luis, "if it is not by taking me dead;
although, whichever way you take me, it will take me lifeless.
At this time, all the more than in the sale had turned to stubbornness.
were, especially Cardenio, Don Fernando, his comrades, the oidor, the
priest, the barber and Don Quixote, who already seemed to him that there was no need to
save more the castle. Cardenio, as he already knew the story of the waiter,
He asked those who wanted to take him what made them want to take him
against his will that boy.
`` Move us, '' answered one of the four, `` to give life to his father, who
This gentleman's absence is in danger of losing her.
To this Don Luis said:
-There is no reason for him to realize my things here: I am free, and I will return if
I like it, and if not, none of you will force me.
"Reason will do it at your mercy," replied the man; and when she
I will not be enough with your mercy, it will be enough with us to do what
we come and what we are obliged to.
"Let us know what this is at the root," said the hearer at this time.
But the man, who knew him, as a neighbor of his house, replied:
"Does not your grace know, senor oidor, this gentleman, who is the son
of his neighbor, who has been absent from his father's house in the habit so
indecent to its quality as your grace can see?
Then the hearer looked at him more attentively and knew him; and, embracing him, said:
-What nonsense are these, Mr. Don Luis, or what powerful causes that
have moved you to come this way, and in this suit, which says so badly with
your quality?
Tears came to the waiter's eyes, and he couldn't answer
word. The listener told the four to calm down, that everything would be done
well; and, taking Don Luis by the hand, he pushed him aside and
he asked what coming that had been.
And as he asked this and other questions, they heard loud voices at the
door of the sale, and it was the cause of which two guests that that
night they had stayed in it, seeing all the people occupied in knowing what
that the four were looking for, had tried to leave without paying what they owed;
but the innkeeper, who attended more to his business than to others, seized them
out of the door and asked for their pay, and their malicious intent with such
words, which moved them to respond to him with their fists; and so,
they began to give such a hand that the poor innkeeper needed to shout
and ask for help. The innkeeper and her daughter did not see another unoccupied to
be able to help Don Quixote, to whom the innkeeper's daughter said:
- Help your mercy, gentleman gentleman, by the virtue that God gave him, to
my poor father, that two bad men are grinding him like a cyber.
To which Don Quixote replied, very spacious and with a lot of phlegm:
-Beautiful maid, your request has no place for now, because I am
prevented from getting involved in another adventure as long as I did not
in which my word has put me. But what I can do to serve you is
what I will now say: run and tell your father to entertain himself in that
fight the best you can, and do not let yourself be defeated in any way, in
so much so that I ask Princess Micomicona for permission to help her
in your care; that if she gives it to me, rest assured that I will get it out of it.
"Sinner of me!" Maritornes, who was in front, said to this: `` First of all,
your mercy reach that license that says, my lord will already be in the other
world.
-Give me, madam, that I reach the license that I say -answered Don
Quixote-; that, as I have it, it will do little to the case that he is in the other
world; that I will get him out of there despite the world that contradicts him; or,
at least, I will give you such revenge from those who sent him there, that
you are more than moderately satisfied.
And without saying more, he went to stand before Dorotea, asking her with
chivalrous and errant words that his greatness be served by
give him license to run and help the Castilian of that castle, who
it was in serious decline. The princess graciously gave it to him, and
he then, clutching his shield and putting his hand on his sword, went to the
door of the sale, where the two guests still brought to badly bring
to the landlord; but, just as she arrived, she became pregnant and stayed, although
Maritornes and the innkeeper told him what to stop at, to help
her lord and husband.
`` Stop me, '' said Don Quixote, `` because it is not lawful for me to put my hand to the sword.
against squire people; but call me here my squire Sancho, that he
touch and concern this defense and revenge.
This happened at the door of the sale, and in it the handfuls and
cairns very at their point, all in damage of the innkeeper and in anger of
Maritornes, the innkeeper and her daughter, who despaired of seeing the cowardice of
Don Quixote, and how badly her husband, lord and father had a hard time.
But let's leave him here, there will be no shortage of someone to help him, or if not, suffer and
he who dares to do more than what his forces promise him, and
Let's go back fifty steps, to see what Don Luis answered
to the hearer, that we leave him aside, asking him the cause of his coming on foot
and in such a vile dress suit. To which the waiter, grasping him tightly by the
hands, as a sign that some great pain was squeezing his heart, and
shedding tears in great abundance, he said:
-My Lord, I do not know how to tell you anything else except that from the point of view
Heaven and our neighborhood made it easier for me to see my wife, Dona Clara, daughter
yours and my lady, from that moment I made her master of my will; and
if yours, my true lord and father, does not prevent it, on this very day
it must be my wife. For her I left my father's house, and for her I put
in this suit, to follow her wherever she went, like the arrow to the
white, or like the sailor to the north. She doesn't know about my wishes any more than
who has been able to understand from a few times that from afar he has seen my
eyes. Yes, sir, you know the wealth and nobility of my parents, and how I
I am his only heir: if it seems to you that these are parts for you to
Venture to make me in all fortunate, welcome me then for your son;
that if my father, carried away by other distinctions of his, I will not like this well
that I knew how to look for myself, the more strength has the time to undo and change the
things that human wills.
In saying this, the enamored young man fell silent, and the hearer remained in hearing him
suspense, confused and admired, thus having heard the manner and discretion with
that Don Luis had discovered his thought, as if seeing himself on the
that he did not know what to take in such a sudden and unexpected business; and
Thus, he did not answer anything else but to calm down for then, and
entertained his servants, that they did not return to him for that day, because
had time to consider what was best for all. Kiss her
hands by force Don Luis, and even bathed them with tears, which could
soften a marble heart, not only that of the hearer, who, discreetly,
She had already known how well her daughter was doing that marriage; Market Stall
that, if possible, I would like to carry it out with the will of Don's father
Luis, of whom he knew he intended to make his son the title.
Already at this time the guests were at peace with the innkeeper, then, for
persuasion and good reasons from Don Quixote, rather than threats, had
paid all he wanted, and Don Luis's servants awaited the end of
the speech of the hearer and the resolution of his master, when the devil, who
sleep, ordered that at that same point the barber entered the sale to
who don Quixote took off Mambrino's helmet and Sancho Panza the gear
of the donkey, which he exchanged with his own; which barber, carrying his donkey
to the stable, he saw Sancho Panza who was dressing I don't know what of the
saddlebag, and just as he saw her he met her, and dared to attack Sancho,
saying:
-Ah, thief, here I have you! Come my basin and my pack, with all
my gear that you stole from me!
Sancho, who saw himself attack so suddenly and heard the vituperations that
they said, with one hand he took hold of the pack, and with the other gave a cairn to the
a barber who bathed his teeth in blood; but not for this did the barber leave
the prey that he had made in the packet; before, he raised his voice in such a way
that all those from the sale came to the noise and quarrel, and said:
-Here of the king and justice, who, over collecting my property, wants me
Kill this highway robber!
"You are lying," answered Sancho, "that I am not a highwayman; what in
A good war my lord Don Quixote won these spoils.
Don Quixote was already in front of him, very happy to see how well he
defended and offended his squire, and from
pro, and proposed in his heart as an armalle knight on the first occasion that
offered him, since it seemed to him that the order of the
chivalry. Among other things that the barber said in the speech of the
pendence, came to say:
-Sirs, so this pack is mine as the death that I owe to God, and so the
I know as if I had given birth to her; and there is my ass in the stable, no
will let me lie; If not, try it on, and if it doesn't come, I will
I will remain infamous. And there is more: that the same day that she took off, I
They also removed a new pot of hoe, which had not been released, which
she was a lady of a shield.
Don Quixote could not contain himself here without answering: and, placing himself between the
two and separating them, placing the pack on the ground, that he had
manifest until the truth was clarified, he said:
-Because your mercies see clearly and manifestly the error in which
is this good squire, because he calls what was, is and will be the helmet of
Mambrino, which I took from him in a good war, and became lord of him with
legitimate and lawful possession! I do not interfere with the pack, that what
in this I will know how to say is that my squire Sancho asked me for a license to remove
the jaeces of the cowardly vanquished horse, and with them adorn yours;
I gave it to him, and he took them, and, if they had been turned from jaez into a pack, no
I will know how to give another reason if it is not the ordinary one: that like those transformations
they are seen in the events of the cavalry; for confirmation of which,
run, Sancho son, and take out here the helmet that this good man claims to be
basin.
"Why, sir," said Sancho, "if we don't have another proof of our
intention that what your grace says, so empty is the helmet of Malino
as the jaez of this good man pack!
"Do what I command you," replied Don Quixote, "that not all things will
castle must be guided by enchantment.
Sancho went to where the basin and the trujo were; and, just as Don Quixote saw her,
He took it in his hands and said:
-Look at your mercedes with what face could this squire say that this is
basin, and not the helmet that I have said; And I swear by the chivalric order that
I profess that this helmet was the same that I took from him, without having added
he didn't even take anything away.
`` There is no doubt about that, '' Sancho said at this time, `` because since my lord
won him until now he has not done more than one battle with him, when he fought
the unlucky chained; And if it weren't for this baciyelmo, it wouldn't happen
then very well, because there were a lot of stones in that trance.
Chapter XLV. Where the question of Mambrino's helmet has just been found out and
of the pack, and other adventures that happened, in all truth
`` How do you like your mercies, gentlemen, '' said the barber, `` of what
these gentle men affirm, because they still insist that this is not empty,
but helmet?
"And whoever says otherwise," said Don Quixote, "I will let you know that
He lies, if he is a knight, and if he is a squire, that he regrets a thousand times.
Our barber, who was present at everything, as he had so well known
Don Quixote's humor, he wanted to exert his folly and carry out the
He teases everyone to laugh, and said, talking to the other barber:
-Mr Barber, or who are you, know that I am also of your trade, and
I have more than twenty years examination letter, and I know very well of all
the tools of the barber shop, without missing one; and neither more nor less
I was a soldier for a time in my youth, and I also know what helmet is, and what it is
morion, and lace headpiece, and other things concerning the militia, I mean, to
the types of arms of the soldiers; and I say, except better to seem,
always referring to the best understanding, that this piece that is here
in front of him and that this good man has in his hands, not only is he not
barber, but he is as far from being one as white is far from black
and the truth from the lie; I also say that this one, although it is a helmet, is not
whole helmet.
"No, by the way," said Don Quixote, "because he is missing half, which is the
beaver.
`` Yes, '' said the priest, who had already understood the intention of his friend the
Barber.
And the same was confirmed by Cardenio, Don Fernando, and their comrades; and even the hearer,
If he weren't so thoughtful about Don Luis's business, he would help, for his
part, to mockery; but the truths of what he thought held him so suspense,
that little or nothing attended to those gifts.
-God help me! said the mocked barber at this time; What is possible that
so many honest people say that this is not a basin, but a helmet? Thing looks like this
that can put a whole university in admiration, however discreet it may be.
Enough: if this basin is a helmet, it must also be this jaez pack
of horse, as this gentleman has said.
`` It seems to me the packet, '' said Don Quixote, `` but I have already said that there is no
I meddle.
`` Whether it is pack or harness, '' said the priest.
Mr. Don Quixote; that in these things of the cavalry all these gentlemen
and I give you the advantage.
"By God, my lords," said Don Quixote, "there are so many and so strange
the things that in this castle, twice that I have stayed in it, have
happened, that I dare not say affirmatively anything of what
about what is contained in it I will wonder, because I imagine that how much
it is about going by way of enchantment. The first time I was very tired
there is a delighted Moor in him, and Sancho did not do very well with other
his henchmen; and last night I was hanging on this arm for almost two hours, without knowing
how or how I did not come to fall into that misfortune. So, put me agora
In a matter of so much confusion to give my opinion, it will be to fall into reckless judgment.
As for what they say that this is a basin, and not a helmet, I already have
answered; But, when it comes to declaring if that is a pack or haunch, I don't dare
to give final sentence: I only leave it to the good opinion of your
Mercedes. Perhaps because they are not knighted, as I am, they will not have
to do with your mercies the enchantments of this place, and they will have the
free understandings, and they will be able to judge of the things of this castle as
they are really and truly, and not as they seemed to me.
`` There is no doubt, '' answered Don Fernando, `` but that Mr. Don Quixote
He said very well today that it is up to us to define this case; and,
because it goes with more foundation, I will secretly take the vows of these
gentlemen, and of what will result I will give full and clear news.
For those who had it in the mood of Don Quixote, it was all matter
of great laughter; but, to those who ignored him, he seemed the greatest
nonsense of the world, especially the four servants of Don Luis, already
Don Luis neither more nor less, and three other passengers who had perhaps arrived
for sale, which had the appearance of being gang members, as, in effect, what
were. But the one who despaired the most was the barber, whose basin, there
in front of his eyes, he had become a helmet of Mambrino, and whose
packet thought without a doubt that it would be returned to him richly from
horse; and the one and the other laughed to see how Don Fernando was walking
taking the vows of one another, speaking them in the ear so that in secret
declare if that jewel on which so much had been
fought. And, after he had taken the vows of those who to Don Quixote
they knew, he said aloud:
-The point is, good man, I'm already tired of taking so many
you seem, because I see that I do not ask anyone what I want to know that I do not
say that it is nonsense to say that this is a donkey pack, if not jaez
of horse, and even of native horse; and thus, you will have to be patient,
because, despite you and your donkey, this is a harness and not a saddlebag, and
you have alleged and proved very wrong on your part.
"I don't have it in heaven," said the overbarber, "if all of you
Mercedes are not deceived, and may my soul appear before God as it does to me.
it seems to me a packet, and not a harness; but there are laws ..., etcetera; and I don't say
plus; and in truth I'm not drunk: I haven't had breakfast,
sin no.
The nonsense that the barber said caused laughter no less than the
nonsense of Don Quixote, who at this time said:
-Here there is nothing more to do, but that each one takes what is theirs, now
Whoever God gave it to, Saint Peter bless it.
One of the four said:
-If this is no longer a heavy mockery, I cannot persuade myself that men
of such good understanding as they are, or seem, all those who are here,
dare to say and affirm that this is not a basin, nor is that packet; more,
as I see that they affirm it and say it, I give myself to understand that it does not lack
mystery to insist on a thing so contrary to what it shows us
truth and the same experience; because, I vote so! -and threw him round-,
that they do not give me to understand how many today live in the world the other way around that
This is not a barber's basin and this is an ass's saddlebag.
"It could well be a donkey," said the priest.
`` So much riding, '' said the servant, `` that the case does not consist in that, but in whether
It is or it is not a packet, as your mercies say.
Hearing this, one of the gang members who had entered, who had heard the
pendency and cystion, full of rage and anger, said:
-Tan pack is like my father; and whoever else has said or says must
be made grape.
"You lie like a villain," replied Don Quixote.
And, lifting the sandeel, which never left his hands, he was going to unload
such a blow to the head that, unless the squad stranded, he would be
lying there. The sandeel shattered on the ground, and the rest
gang members, who saw their partner being treated badly, raised their voices asking
favor to the Holy Brotherhood.
The innkeeper, who belonged to the gang, entered immediately by his rod and by his
sword, and stood beside his companions; Don Luis's servants
They surrounded Don Luis, because with the commotion they did not leave them; the barber,
Seeing the house turned upside down, he took hold of his packet, and did the same
Sancho; Don Quixote put his hand on his sword and lashed out at the gang members.
Don Luis called out to his servants to leave him and harass Don
Quixote, and Cardenio, and Don Fernando, who all favored Don
Quixote. The priest shouted, the innkeeper shouted, his daughter was grieving,
Maritornes was crying, Dorotea was confused, Luscinda was in suspense, and Dona Clara
passed out. The barber beat Sancho, Sancho ground the barber; Don
Luis, whom one of his servants dared to take his arm because he did not
went, he gave him a handful that bathed his teeth in blood; the hearer
defended, Don Fernando had under his feet a squad,
measuring his body with them very much to his taste. The innkeeper reinforces
the voice, asking favor of the Holy Brotherhood: so that the whole sale was
cries, voices, screams, confusion, fears, startles, misfortunes,
stabbing, markers, sticks, kicks and effusion of blood. And, in the middle
of this chaos, machine and labyrinth of things, he was represented in the memory of
Don Quixote, who saw himself caught sick and kicked in the discord of the field of
Agramante; And thus he said, with a voice that thundered the sale:
-Have you all; all sheathe; everyone calm down; listen to me all, yes
everyone wants to stay alive!
At whose loud voice they all stood, and he went on saying:
-Didn't I tell you, gentlemen, that this castle was enchanted, and that some
demon region must inhabit it? In confirmation of which,
I want you to see through your eyes how it has happened here and moved
between us the discord of the field of Agramante. Look how there is
Fight for the sword, here for the horse, here for the eagle, here for the
helmet, and we all fight, and we all don't understand each other. Come then, your
Your mercy, lord hearer, and your mercy, lord priest, and the one serve as king
Agramante, and the other from King Nephew, and put us in peace; because by God
Almighty that is a great beauty that so many main people like here
we are being killed by such slight causes.
The quadrilleros, who did not understand Don Quixote's phrasis, and looked
mistreated by Don Fernando, Cardenio and their comrades, they did not want to calm down;
the barber did, because in the quarrel his beards and his
packsaddle; Sancho, at the slightest voice of his master, obeyed like a good servant;
Don Luis's four servants also stayed, seeing how
little was going to them in not being it. Only the innkeeper insisted that they
punish the insolence of that madman, who at every step disturbed his
sale. Finally, the rumor died down by then, the packet stayed
for haez until judgment day, and the basin for a helmet and the sale for
castle in don Quixote's imagination.
Put then, now at rest, and made friends all at the persuasion of the hearer
and the priest, Don Luis's servants returned to insist that at the moment
come with them; and, while he agreed with them, the hearer
He communicated with Don Fernando, Cardenio and the priest what he should do in that
case, telling them the reasons that Don Luis had told him. Anyway,
It was agreed that Don Fernando would tell Don Luis's servants who he was
and how it was his pleasure that Don Luis went with him to Andalusia, where from his
Brother the Marquis would be estimated as the value of Don Luis deserved; because
In this way it was known of Don Luis's intention that he would not return for
This time in the eyes of his father, if they were to tear him to pieces. Understood,
Well, of the four the quality of Don Fernando and the intention of Don Luis,
determined among themselves that the three recounted what was happening to
his father, and the other stayed to serve Don Luis, no longer leave him until
let them come back for him, or see what his father ordered them to do.
In this way that quarreling machine was appeased, by the authority of
Agramante and prudencia of the king Sobrino; but, seeing himself as the enemy of the
concord and the emulator of peace despised and mocked, and the little fruit that
had gained from having put them all in such a confusing maze, he agreed
to try the hand again, resuscitating new quarrels and anxieties.
It is, then, the case that the quadrilleros calmed down, having heard the
quality of those who had fought with them, and withdrew from the
pendency, because it seemed to them that, in whatever way it happened, they had
to bear the worst of the battle; but one of them, which was the one that was ground
and kicked by Don Fernando, it came to his memory that, among some
commandments that he brought to apprehend some criminals, he brought one
against Don Quixote, whom the Holy Brotherhood had ordered to arrest, for
the freedom he gave the galley slaves, and as Sancho, with good reason, had
feared.
Imagining, then, this, he wanted to ascertain whether the signs that Don Quixote
they came in handy, and, taking a parchment from her bosom, she came across the one
I was looking for; and, starting to read from space, because he was not a good reader, to
every word he read put his eyes on Don Quixote, and he was comparing the
signs of the commandment with the face of Don Quixote, and found that, undoubtedly
some, it was the one that the commandment prayed. And, as soon as it was certified,
when, picking up his parchment, on the left he took the commandment, and with
the right grabbed Don Quixote by the neck tightly, which would not let him
encourage, already loud voices said:
-Favor the Holy Brotherhood! And, to show that I really ask,
Read this commandment, where it is contained that this robber of
roads.
The priest took the commandment, and saw how it was true how much the squad
it said, and how it agreed with the signs with Don Quixote; which, seeing
treat badly of that villain scoundrel, putting the anger at its point and
crunching the bones of his body, as best he could, he seized the
squad with both hands on his throat, who, unless he was helped by
his companions, there he would leave his life before Don Quixote did. The
landlord, who by force was to favor those of his trade, then came
dalle please. The innkeeper, who again saw her husband in quarrels, from
Again he raised his voice, the tenor of which was later brought by Maritornes and his daughter,
asking favor of heaven and those who were there. Sancho said, seeing what
what was happening:
- Long live the Lord, it is true what my master says about the charms of this
castle, because it is not possible to live an hour quietly in it!
Don Fernando dispatched the cadre and Don Quixote, and, with
between them, he unlocked their hands, that the one in the collar of the
one, and the other in the throat of the other, they had good grip; but not for
This is why the gang members stopped asking for their prisoner, and that they help them
be given to him bound and surrendered to all his will, because that was the
service of the king and of the Holy Brotherhood, on whose behalf they were again asked
help and favor to make that prison of that robber and robber of
trails and racing. He laughed at hearing Don Quixote say these reasons; and with
much calm, he said:
-Come here, you foul and bastardized people: skipping roads do you call when you give
freedom to the chained, release the prisoners, run to the wretched,
raise the fallen, remedy the needy? Ah infamous people, worthy of
your low and vile understanding that heaven does not communicate to you the value that
locks himself up in the cavalry errant, nor does he give you to understand the sin and
ignorance that you are in not reverence the shadow, the more the
assistance, of any knight errant! Come here, thieves in
gang, not gang, highwaymen licensed by the
Holy Brotherhood; tell me: who was the ignorant who signed the commandment of
prison against such a gentleman as I am? Who the one who ignored who they are
many of all judiciary were knights errant, and that their law is their
sword; their fueros, their spirits; its prematics, its will? Who was he
fool, I say again, he does not know that there is no secutoria of hidalgo with
so many preeminences, nor esenciones, as that acquired by a gentleman
errant the day he knights and surrenders to the hard exercise of
chivalry? What errant knight paid his chest, alcabala, chapín de la
queen, forera currency, portazgo or boat? What tailor made you
dress to make? What Castilian welcomed you in his castle that
make pay for the cleavage? What king did not seat him at his table? What maiden does
did he become fond of and gave himself over to him, to all his will and will? AND,
finally, what knight errant has there been, is there and will there be in the world, who
do not have the courage to give only four hundred sticks to four hundred
squads that are put in front of him?
Chapter XLVI. Of the remarkable adventure of the quadrilleros, and the great
ferocity of our good knight Don Quixote
While Don Quixote was saying this, the priest was persuading the
gang members like Don Quixote was lacking in judgment, as they saw him from his
works and by their words, and that they had no reason to run that business
go ahead, then, even if they seized him and took him away, then they had to leave him
because he's crazy; to which the one with the commandment replied that it was not for him to judge
of Don Quixote's madness, but to do what was commanded by his elder,
and that once imprisoned, they even released three hundred.
`` With all that, '' said the priest, `` this time you will not take him, not even
he will let himself be carried away, to what I understand.
Indeed, the priest knew so much to say to them, and Don Quixote knew so many follies
to do, what more crazy than he would the gang members if they did not know the
lack of Don Quixote; and thus, they had the good of appeasing, and even of being
party to make peace between the barber and Sancho Panza, who still
they attended his quarrel with great rancor. Finally, they, as members
of justice, mediated the cause and were arbitrators of it, in such a way that
both parties were, if not entirely happy, at least somewhat
satisfied, because the packets were exchanged, and not the girths and jáquimas;
and as regards Mambrino's helmet, the priest, under his breath and without
Don Quixote understood it, gave him eight reales for the basin, and the barber
made a receipt and not to be misled at that time, nor by
always never amen.
So calm these two quarrels, which were the most principal and
more, it remained for Don Luis's servants to be content to return the
three, and that one stayed to accompany him where Don Fernando wanted him
carry; and, as already good luck and better fortune had begun to break
spears and to facilitate difficulties in favor of lovers of sale and
the brave della, wanted to carry it out and give everything a happy success,
because the servants were satisfied with what Don Luis wanted; what did you get
Dona Clara so happy that no one at that time looked at her face
that he did not know the rejoicing of his soul.
Zoraida, although she did not quite understand all the events she had seen,
saddened and made a great deal of joy, as he saw and noticed the faces of
each one, especially his Spanish, in whom he always had the
eyes and had his soul hanging. The innkeeper, who was not overlooked
the gift and reward that the priest had made to the barber, asked for the cleavage
of Don Quixote, with the damage of their hides and lack of wine, swearing that
Rocinante would not leave the sale, nor would Sancho's donkey, without being
pay first until the last chip. The priest appeased everything, and paid for it
Don Fernando, since the hearer, of very good will, had also
offered pay; and in such a way they were all in peace and quiet, that already
the sale did not seem the discord of the field of Agramante, as Don Quixote
He had said, but the same peace and quiet of the Otavian time; of everything
which was a common opinion that thanks should be given to the good intention and
much eloquence of the priest and the incomparable liberality of Don
Fernando.
Seeing, then, Don Quixote free and freed from so many quarrels, thus
of his squire as his, it seemed to him that it would be good to continue his
journey and end that great adventure for which he had been called and
selected; And so, with resolute determination, he went to put his face before
Dorotea, who did not allow him to speak a word until
get up; And he, by obedecella, stood up and said to her:
-It is a common proverb, beautiful lady, that diligence is the mother of good
fortune, and in many grave things experience has shown that
The merchant's request brings the dubious lawsuit to a successful conclusion; but in none
This truth is shown more in things than in those of war, where the
haste and swiftness prevents the speeches of the enemy, and achieves the
victory before the opponent takes defense. All this I say, high and
beautiful lady, because it seems to me that our stay in this castle already
It is without profit, and it could hurt us so much that we miss it
someday; because, who knows if by hidden spies and diligents there will be
Has your enemy the giant already known that I am going to destroy him ?; and,
giving time to it, fortify itself in some impregnable castle or
strength against whom my diligence and the strength of my
tireless arm. So, my lady, let us prevent, as I have said, with
our diligence his designs, and then let us go to good fortune;
that your greatness is no more than you want, how much I take
to see me with your opposite.
He was silent and did not say more Don Quixote, and waited very calmly for the answer from
the beautiful infanta; which, with a stately manner and accommodated in the style of
Don Quixote, answered him in this way:
-I thank you, sir, for the desire that you show to have
favor me in my great care, well as a gentleman, to whom he is attached and
concerning favoring the orphans and needy; and for heaven's sake
yours and my wish are fulfilled, so you can see that there are grateful
women in the world. And in my departure, be it later; that I don't have anymore
will than yours: dispose of me in all your guise and spirit;
than the one who once gave you the defense of her person and put in your
the restoration of their lordships must not want to go against what the
I will order your prudence.
"At the hand of God," said Don Quixote; Well, that's how a lady told me
humiliates, I do not want to miss the opportunity to raise her screen and put her in her
inherited throne. The departure is later, because he is putting spurs on me
desire and on the road what is often said that in the delay is the danger.
And, well, he has not created heaven, nor seen hell, none that scares me
nor cow, saddle, Sancho, Rocinante, and prepare your donkey and the
pafrén of the queen, and say goodbye to the Castilian and these gentlemen, and
we go from here to the point.
Sancho, who was present at all, said, shaking his head to one side and
to another:
-Oh sir, sir, and how there is more evil in the village than it sounds, with
pardon be said of the honored touches!
-What evil can there be in any village, or in all the cities of the world,
that can be blown to my detriment, villain?
`` If your grace gets angry, '' answered Sancho, `` I will be silent, and I will stop
say what I am obliged as a good squire, and how a good servant should
tell your lord.
`` Say what you want, '' replied Don Quixote, `` as your words cannot
lead me to fear; that if you have him, you make like who you are, and if
I don't have him, I act like who I am.
-It's not that, I was a sinner to God! answered Sancho, but I have
by the way and by proven that this lady who claims to be queen of the great
Micomicón kingdom is no more than my mother; because, to be what she says,
not go around sniffing with any of those who are in the wheel, to turn
upside down and at every turn.
She stood red with Sancho Dorotea's reasons, because it was true that his
husband Don Fernando, once, stealing other eyes, had caught with
lips part of the prize that his wishes deserved (which he had seen
Sancho, and it seemed to him that that ease was more of a courtesan lady
that of queen of such a great kingdom), and could not or did not want to answer a word to
Sancho, but allowed him to continue his talk, and he was saying:
-I say this, sir, because, if after having walked roads and races, and
after bad nights and worse days, he has to come to reap the fruit of our
jobs the one who is enjoying himself in this sale, there is no reason to give me
Hurry to saddle Rocinante, pack the donkey and dress the palfrey,
Well, we better stay, and every fucking row, and eat.
Oh, goodness to me, and how great was the anger that Don Quixote received,
hearing the broken words of his squire! I say it was so much that,
With a harsh voice and a stuttering tongue, throwing live fire from his eyes,
said:
-O wicked villain, badly regarded, decomposed, ignorant, childish,
foul-mouthed, daring, murmuring and cursing! Such words have you dared
say in my presence and in these illustrious ladies, and such
dishonesty and audacity did you dare to put into your confused imagination?
Get out of my presence, monster of nature, depository of lies,
almario of lies, silo of bellaquerías, inventor of evils, publisher
of nonsense, enemy of decorum that is due to real people! Go away;
do not appear in front of me, on pain of my anger!
And, saying this, he raised his eyebrows, puffed out his cheeks, looked at all
parts, and kicked the ground with his right foot, signaling all
of the anger that he held in his guts. Whose words and furious
gestures was Sancho so shrunken and fearful, that he was glad that in that
instantly the earth would open under his feet and swallow him. And did not know
what to do, but turn your back and remove yourself from the angry presence of
your lord. But the discreet Dorotea, who already had the humor of
Don Quixote, he said, to temper his anger:
-Do not be angry, Mr. Knight of the Sad Figure, of the nonsense that
your good squire has said, because perhaps he should not say them without
occasion, nor from his good understanding and Christian conscience can he
suspect that he bears testimony to anyone; and thus, it has to be believed, without putting
doubt about it, that, as in this castle, according to you, sir knight,
you say, all things go and happen by way of enchantment, it could be,
I mean, that Sancho had seen through this diabolical way what he says that
saw, so offensive to my honesty.
`` By the Almighty God, I swear, '' Don Quixote said at this time, `` that the
your greatness has given in the point, and that some bad vision was put
in front of this sinner Sancho, who made him see what was impossible
to see oneself in another way than that of charms was not; that I know well about the
goodness and innocence of this unfortunate, who does not know how to raise testimonies to
nobody.
"There it is and there it will be," said Don Fernando; for which it owes your mercy,
Mr. Don Quixote, forgive him and reduce him to the guild of your grace, sicut
erat in principle, before such visions drove him out of his mind.
Don Quixote replied that he forgave him, and the priest went for Sancho, the
Who came very humble, and, kneeling, asked his master's hand; and
he gave it to her, and, after letting him kiss it, he blessed her,
saying:
-Agora you will finish knowing, Sancho son, to be true what I many others
I have sometimes told you that all things in this castle are made by way
of enchantment.
"I think so," said Sancho, "except that about the blanket, which really
it happened by ordinary means.
"Don't believe it," replied Don Quixote; that if so, I would avenge you
then, and even now; but neither then nor ago could I nor did I see who to take
revenge for your wrong.
They all wanted to know what the blanket was, and the landlord told it,
point by point: the poultry of Sancho Panza, of which they not a little laughed
everybody; and that no less Sancho would run, if again he did not assure him of his
I love that it was an enchantment; since Sancho's nonsense never reached
so much so that he believed not to be pure and ascertained truth, without a mixture of deception
some, having been kept by people of flesh and blood, and not by
ghosts dreamed or imagined, as their lord believed and affirmed it.
Two days were already gone by that all that illustrious company
it was for sale; and, seeming to them that it was time to leave, they gave
order so that, without going to work to return Dorotea and Don Fernando with
Don Quixote to his village, with the invention of the queen's freedom
Micomicona, might the priest and the barber take him away, as they wished, and
seek the cure of their madness in their land. And what they ordered was that
they arranged with an ox carter who happened to pass through there,
to wear it like this: they made one like a cage of sticks
latticework, capable of allowing Don Quixote to fit comfortably into it; and
then Don Fernando and his comrades, with Don Luis's servants and the
squad, together with the innkeeper, all by order and opinion of the
priest, they covered their faces and disguised themselves, who in a way and
who else, so that Don Quixote seemed to be other people from the
that I had seen in that castle.
This done, with great silence they entered where he was sleeping
and resting from past skirmishes. They came to him, how free and safe
of such an event he slept, and, holding him tightly, they tied him very well
hands and feet, so that when he awoke with a start,
he could wiggle, or do anything else but admire himself and stop seeing
in front of him so strange visions; and then realized what his
continuous and wild imagination represented him, and it was believed that all
those figures were ghosts of that enchanted castle, and that, without
doubt, he was already delighted, because he could not shake or defend: everything
ready as the priest had thought would happen, tracer of this machine.
Only Sancho, of all those present, was in his own mind and in his
same figure; which, although he lacked very little to have the same
illness of his master, did not stop knowing who were all those
distorted figures; but he did not dare to unseat his mouth, until he saw what it stopped
that assault and prison of his master, who did not speak a word,
attending to see the whereabouts of his misfortune; What was it that, bringing there the
cage, they locked him inside, and they nailed the timbers so hard that
they could not be broken by two pulls.
They then took him on their shoulders, and as he left the room a voice was heard
fearful, all that the barber knew how to train, not the one with the pack, but the
another, which said:
-Oh Knight of the Sad Figure!
that you are going, because that is how it is convenient to end the adventure in which you
great effort put you; which will end when the angry spotted lion
with the white sluggish dove yoguieren in one, already after
the tall cervices humiliated to the soft marriage yoke; whose unheard of
consortium will come to light the brave cubs, who will imitate the
Rumbling claws of the brave father. And this will be before the follower of
The fugitive nymph faga dos vegadas the visit of the bright images with
its rapid and natural course. And you, oh, the most noble and obedient squire who
had a sword on tape, beards on his face and smell in his nostrils!
faint or discontent to see bring anxiety in front of your eyes just like the flower
of the errant cavalry; that soon, if the shaper of the world pleases,
you will look so high and so sublimated that you do not know yourself, and they will not come out
the promises that your good lord has made you disappointed. And make sure,
part of the wise Mentironiana, that your salary be paid to you, as you will see
for the work; and follow in the footsteps of the brave and enchanted knight, who
you should go where you both stop. And, because it is not lawful for me to say
Another thing, to God it remains, that I return to where I know myself.
And, at the end of the prophecy, he raised his voice on point, and then lowered it,
with such a tender accent, that even the wise men of the mockery were by
to believe that what they heard was true.
Don Quixote was consoled with the heard prophecy, because then he colluded
of everything in all the significance of it; and he saw that they promised to see each other
town councilors in holy and due marriage to their beloved Dulcinea del Toboso,
from whose happy womb the cubs, which were her children, would come out to
perpetual glory of La Mancha. And, believing this well and firmly, he raised his
voice, and, with a great sigh, said:
-Oh you, whoever you are, how well you have predicted me!
that you ask for me the charming sage who is in charge of my things, that
do not let me perish in this prison where now they take me, until I see
fulfilled such joyful and incomparable promises such as the ones that I am here
have made; that, as this may be, I will have for glory the penalties of my jail, and
by relief these chains that bind me, and not by hard battlefield this
bed on which they lie me, but for a soft bed and a happy thalamus. And, in what
that touches the consolation of Sancho Panza, my squire, I trust his
goodness and good behavior that will not leave me in good or bad luck; because,
When it does not happen, by his or by my luck, the power I give the
insula, or another equivalent thing that I have promised to him, at least his
salary cannot be lost; that in my will, which is already done, I leave
declared what is to be given him, not according to his many good
services, but to my possibility.
Sancho Panza bowed to her with much restraint, and kissed her on both
hands, because one could not, because they were tied between both.
Then those visions took the cage on their shoulders, and placed it in the
ox cart.
Chapter XLVII. In the strange way in which Don Quixote de la
Mancha, with other famous events
When Don Quixote saw himself in a cage and on top of the car,
said:
-I have read many and very serious stories of knights errant, but
I have never read, nor seen, nor heard, that the enchanted knights
Wear this way and with the space that these lazy and latecomers promise
animals; because they always tend to take them through the air, with a stranger
lightness, enclosed in some brown and dark cloud, or in some car of
fire, or already on some hippogriff or other similar beast; but what to me
bring me now on a bullock cart, long live God who puts me in
confusion! But maybe the chivalry and the charms of our times
they must follow another path that the ancients did. And could also
be that, as I am a new gentleman in the world, and the first to have
resurrected the long-forgotten exercise of adventurous cavalry, also
again other sorts of enchantments and other modes have been invented
to lead the enchanted. What do you think of this, Sancho son?
`` I don't know what it seems to me, '' answered Sancho, `` because it is not as well-read as
your mercy in the errant scriptures; but, with all that, I would dare
affirm and swear that these visions that go around here, that are not entirely
catholic.
-Catholic? My father! Don Quixote answered. How are they to be catholic
if they are all demons who have taken fantastic bodies to come to do
this already put me in this state? And if you want to see this truth, touch them and
palpates, and you will see how they have no body but air, and how it does not consist
more than in appearance.
"Dear God, sir," Sancho replied, "I've already touched them;" and this devil that
here he is so solicitous, he is plump with meat, and has another very
different from what I have heard say that demons have; because, according to
it is said, they all smell like sulfur stone and other bad smells; but this
it smells like amber from half a league.
Sancho said this for Don Fernando, who, as such a gentleman, must have smelled like
that Sancho used to say.
Don Quixote replied, Do not marvel at me, Sancho friend, because you
I let it be known that the devils know a lot, and since they bring smells
with it, they do not smell anything, because they are spirits, and if they smell, they cannot
smell good things, but bad and hidiondas. And the reason is that like them,
wherever they are, they bring hell with them, and cannot receive
any kind of relief in their torments, and the good smell is something that
delight and content, it is not possible that they smell good. And if you
It seems that that demon you say smells like amber, or you are delusional, or he
he wants to deceive you by making you not think of him as a demon.
All these conversations happened between master and servant; and, fearing Don Fernando
and Cardenio that Sancho did not come to fully realize his
invention, who was already well within reach, they determined to abbreviate
with the departure; and, calling the innkeeper aside, they ordered him to saddle up
Rocinante and saddle Sancho's donkey; which he did with a lot
promptness.
Already in this, the priest had arranged with the squads who
accompany them to their place, giving them something every day. Cardenio hung from the
The saddle of Rocinante's saddle, with one end the adarga and the other the basin,
and by signs he ordered Sancho to get on his donkey and take the reins
to Rocinante, and placed the two crewmen on both sides of the car with
their shotguns. But, before the car moved, the inn came out, its
daughter and Maritornes to say goodbye to Don Quixote, pretending they were crying
pain of his misfortune; to whom Don Quixote said:
-Don't cry, my good ladies, for all these misfortunes are attached to the
who profess what I profess; and if these calamities did not happen to me,
I did not consider myself a famous knight errant; because to the knights of
little name and fame such cases never happen to them, because there is no
world who remembers them. To the brave yes, who are envious of
his virtue and bravery to many princes and many other knights, who
they try by bad ways to destroy the good ones. But, with all that, the
virtue is so powerful that, by itself, despite all the necromancy
knew its first inventor, Zoroastes, will be victorious at all times, and will give
of itself light in the world, as the sun gives it in the sky. Forgive me, beautiful
Ladies, if there is any mess, through my carelessness, I have dated you, that
Willingly and knowingly, I never gave to anyone; and pray to God take me out
prisons, where some ill-intentioned charming has put me; yes of
They see me free, the mercies that in this
castle you have dated me, to gratify them, servile and reward them
as they deserve.
While the ladies of the castle this happened with Don Quixote, the priest and
The barber said goodbye to Don Fernando and his comrades, and to the captain and
of his brother and all those happy ladies, especially Dorotea
and Luscinda. They all embraced and stayed to give news of their events,
Don Fernando telling the priest where he was to write to inform him of what
that Don Quixote stopped, assuring him that there would be nothing he liked more
let him know; and that he, likewise, would warn him of everything that he
He saw that he could please him, both in his marriage and in the baptism of
Zoraida, and the success of Don Luis, and Luscinda's return home. The priest
He offered to do whatever was commanded, with all punctuality. They returned to
hugging each other again, and again they returned to new offers.
The innkeeper came to the priest and gave him some papers, telling him that he had
found in a lining of the suitcase where the Curious Novel was found
impertinent, and that, since its owner had not returned there, that he
take all; that, since he did not know how to read, he did not love them. The priest
He thanked, and, opening them later, he saw that at the beginning of the writing it said:
A novel by Rinconete y Cortadillo, where he understood to be a novel and
He concluded that, since that of the impertinent Curiosity had been good, that also
That one would be, since it could be if they were all from the same author; and so, the
he put it away, intending to read it when he was comfortable.
He got on horseback, and so did his friend the barber, with his masks, because
were not later acquainted with Don Quixote, and they began to walk after him.
car. And the order they carried was this: the car went first, guiding its
owner; on both sides went the squad, as has been said, with their
shotguns; Then Sancho Panza followed on his donkey, leading
Rocinante. Behind all this were the priest and the barber on their
mighty mules, their faces covered, as has been said, with grave and
rested continent, walking no farther than the slow passage of
The oxen. Don Quixote was sitting in the cage, his hands tied, stretched out
feet, and leaning against the gates, with so much silence and so much patience
as if he were not a man of flesh, but a stone statue.
And so, with that space and silence they walked up to two leagues,
they came to a valley, where it seemed to the herder to be a comfortable place to
rest and feed the oxen; and, communicating with the priest, it was
seem like the barber to walk a little more, because he knew, behind a
recited that near there was shown, there was a valley of more grass and much
better than where they wanted to stop. He took the opinion of the barber, and so,
they went on their way again.
At this, the priest turned his face, and saw that behind him they were coming up to
six or seven horsemen, well placed and dressed, of which
were quickly reached, because they walked not with the phlegm and repose of the
oxen, but as one who went on canon mules and with the desire to arrive
ready to nap for sale, which looked less than a league from there.
The diligent came to the lazy and greeted each other courteously; and one of
those who came, who, in resolution, was canon of Toledo and lord of the
others who accompanied him, seeing the concerted procession of the car,
quadrilleros, Sancho, Rocinante, priest and barber, and more to Don Quixote,
caged and imprisoned, he couldn't help wondering what it meant to carry
that man that way; although it had already been implied, seeing
the insignia of the quadrilleros, which must have been some fancy
robber, or other delinquent whose punishment touched the Holy Brotherhood. One
of the quadrilleros, to whom the question was asked, answered there:
-Sir, what does this gentleman mean to go this way, tell him, because
we do not know.
Don Quixote heard the talk, and said:
- Fortunately, your mercies, gentlemen, are you well versed and expert?
in this cavalry errant thing? Because if they are, I will communicate with them
my misfortunes, and if not, there is no reason to tire me in decillas.
And, at this time, the priest and the barber had already arrived, seeing that the
Walkers were in talks with Don Quixote de la Mancha, to answer
so that their artifice was not discovered.
The canon, to which Don Quixote said, replied:
-In truth, brother, that I know more about books of chivalry than about the Suumules
of Villalpando. I crave that, if it is only in this, surely you can
communicate with me what you want.
"At the hand of God," replied Don Quixote. Well that's right, I want to, sir
gentleman, that you know that I am delighted in this cage, out of envy and
fraud of charming baddies; that virtue is more persecuted from the bad
that beloved of the good ones. I am a knight errant, and not one of whose
names were never remembered by Fame to eternalize them in his memory, but rather
those who, despite and despite the same envy, and how many magicians
bred Persia, Brahmins India, gynophists Ethiopia, he has to put his
name in the temple of immortality to serve as an example and paragon
in the centuries to come, where knights errant will see the footsteps that
must continue, if they want to reach the summit and honorable highness of the
weapons.
"Senor Don Quixote de la Mancha is true," said the priest at this time;
that he is delighted in this cart, not because of his faults and sins, but because of
the evil intention of those whom virtue angers and bravery angers.
This is, sir, the Knight of the Sad Figure, if you already heard him name
in time, whose valiant deeds and great deeds will be written
in hard bronzes and in eternal marbles, no matter how much envy
to darken them and malice to hide them.
When the canon heard the prisoner and the free man speak in such a style,
was about to make the cross, admired, and could not know what had
eventful; and all who came with him fell in the same admiration.
In this, Sancho Panza, who had come to hear the talk, to
marinate it all, said:
-Now, gentlemen, love me well or love me badly for what I say, the case
That is why my lord Don Quixote is delighted like my mother; he
has his full judgment, he eats and drinks and relieves himself as the
other men, and as he did yesterday, before they caged him. Being this
So, how do you want me to understand that you are delighted? Well I have heard
tell many people that the enchanted ones neither eat, sleep, nor speak,
and my master, if they are not at hand, more than thirty procurators will speak.
And, turning to look at the priest, he continued saying:
"Ah, priest, priest!" Did your grace think that I do not know him, and
He will think that I do not know it and I guess where these new ones are headed
enchantments? Well, know that I know you, no matter how much you cover up your face,
and know that I understand you, no matter how much you hide your lies. Anyway, where
envy reigns, virtue cannot live, nor where there is scarcity
liberality. Evil be the devil !; that, if by his reverence it were not, this
it was already time that my lord was married to the Infanta Micomicona, and
I was an earl, at least, because you couldn't expect anything else, like that from the
goodness of my lord of the Sad Figure as of the greatness of my
services. But I see that what is said out there is true: that the wheel
Fortune is smarter than a mill wheel, and those who yesterday
they were in little penguins today they are on the ground. Of my children and my wife I
heavy, for when they could and should expect to see their father enter through their
gates made governor or visorrey of some island or kingdom, they will see him
enter made a groom of horses. All this I have said, priest, is not
more than making your fatherhood more expensive, raise awareness of the bad treatment
that it is done to my lord, and take a good look, do not ask God in the other life this
prison of my master, and take charge of all those aids and goods
that my lord Don Quixote stops doing at this time that he is imprisoned.
"Give me those lamps!" said the barber at this point. Also you,
Sancho, are you from your master's brotherhood? Long live the Lord, what am I seeing
that you have to keep him company in the cage, and that you have to be so
enchanted as he is, because of his humor and his chivalry! On
at a bad point you got ready of his promises, and at a bad hour it entered your
helmets the island that you desire so much.
`` I am not pregnant with anyone, '' answered Sancho, `` nor am I a man who
I would let go of the king, whatever he was; and, although poor, I am an old Christian,
and I owe nothing to anyone; and if I wish, others wish for other things
worst; and each one is the son of his works; and, under being a man, I can
become pope, the more governor of an island, and the more being able to earn
so many my lord who lacks who dallas. Your mercy look how
speak, sir barber; that it is not all to make beards, and something goes from Pedro to
Pedro. Say it because we all know each other, and I have not been given
fake. And in this of the charm of my master, God knows the truth; and stay
here, because it is worse meneallo.
The barber did not want to answer Sancho, because he did not discover with his
simplicities that he and the priest tried so hard to cover up; and, for this
The same fear, the priest had told the canon to walk a little ahead:
that he would tell her the mystery of the caged, with other things that would give him
taste. The canon did so, and went forward with his servants and with him:
He was attentive to everything he wanted to say about the condition, life,
madness and customs of Don Quixote, briefly telling him the beginning and
cause of his madness, and all the progress of his events, until he had
put in that cage, and the dignity they wore of taking him to their
earth, to see if by some means they could find a remedy for their madness.
The servants and the canon were again amazed at hearing the strange story
of Don Quixote, and when he had finished hearing it, he said:
- Truly, priest, I find on my own that they are harmful
in the republic these are called chivalric books; and, although I have read,
carried away in idle and false taste, almost the beginning of all the more than
there are printouts, I have never been able to accommodate myself to read any from beginning to
out, because it seems to me that, which more, which less, they are all the same
thing, and this one has no more than that, nor another than the other. And according to me
it seems to me, this genre of writing and composition falls below that of
the fables that they call milesias, that are crazy tales, that attend
only to delight, and not to teach: contrary to what the
apologetic fables, that delight and teach together. And, since the
The main intent of such books is to delight, I do not know how
they can get it, going full of so many and such outrageous nonsense;
that the delight that is conceived in the soul must be of beauty and
concordance that sees or contemplates in things that the sight or imagination
they put him in front of him; and everything that has in itself ugliness and decomposition does not
it can make us happy. Well, what beauty can there be, or what
proportion of parts to the whole and of the whole to the parts, in a book or
fable where a sixteen-year-old boy stabs a giant
like a tower, and divides it into two halves, as if it were a weakling; and
that, when they want to paint us a battle, after having said that there is
on the part of the enemies a million competitors, whatever against
them the lord of the book, necessarily, badly that we are sorry, we have to
understand that such a gentleman achieved victory for only the value of his
strong arm? Well, what about the ease with which a queen or
Heir empress leads in the arms of an errant and unknown
gentleman? What ingenuity, if not altogether barbarous and uneducated, can
content yourself reading that a great tower full of knights goes by the sea
ahead, like a ship with a prosperous wind, and today it is dusk in Lombardy, and
tomorrow dawns in lands of Preste Juan de las Indias, or in others that neither
Did Ptolemy discover them, nor did Marco Polo see them? And, if this were answered to me
that those who compose such books write them as things of falsehood, and that
thus, they are not obliged to look into delicacies or truths, to answer them
hía me that both the lie is better the more it seems true, and so much
the more it pleases when it has more than what is doubtful and possible. Have to marry the
lying fables with the understanding of those who read them,
writing in such a way that, facilitating the impossible, smoothing the
greatness, suspending spirits, admire, suspend, exult and
entertain, so that admiration and joy walk at the same pace
together; And all these things will not be able to do the one who flees from the
verisimilitude and imitation, in whom consists the perfection of what
is written. I have not seen any chivalric book that makes a body of
entire fable with all its members, so that the medium corresponds to the
beginning, and the end at the beginning and in the middle; but they compose them with
so many members, that more seem to have intention to form a chimera or
a monster than to make a proportionate figure. Out of this, they are in the
tough style; in deeds, incredible; in love, lascivious; in the
courtesies, frowned upon; long in battles, foolish in reason,
crazy on travel, and finally oblivious to all discreet
artifice, and for this worthy of being banished from the Christian republic,
like useless people.
The priest was listening to him with great attention, and he seemed to him a man of
good understanding, and that he was right in what he said; and so, he said that,
for being he of his own opinion and having an aversion to the books of chivalry,
he had burned all of Don Quixote's, which were many. And told him the
scrutiny he had made of them, and those he had condemned to fire and
left alive, of which the canon laughed not a little, and said that, with all
how badly he had said about such books, he found in them a good thing:
which was the subject they offered so that a good understanding could
show themselves in them, because they gave a long and spacious field where without
Some embarrassment could run the pen, discovering shipwrecks, storms,
reunions and battles; painting a brave captain with all parts
that to be such are required, being prudent by preventing
cunning of his enemies, and eloquent orator persuading or dissuading
his soldiers, mature in council, quick in determination, so brave
in waiting as in rushing; painting now a pitiful and tragic
event, now a joyous and unexpected event; there a very beautiful
lady, honest, discreet and demure; here a Christian knight, brave and
restrained; here a wild boastful barbarian; here a courteous prince,
courageous and well regarded; representing kindness and loyalty of vassals,
greatness and favors of lords. Astrologer can already be shown, already
excellent cosmographer, already a musician, already intelligent in matters of state,
and maybe he'll get a chance to show himself a necromancer, if he wants. May
show the cunning of Ulixes, the piety of Aeneas, the bravery of Achilles,
Hector's misfortunes, Sinon's betrayals, Eurialius's friendship,
the liberality of Alexander, the courage of Caesar, the clemency and truth of
Trajan, the fidelity of Zopiro, the prudence of Cato; and finally,
all those actions that can make an illustrious man perfect, now
putting them into one, now dividing them into many.
-And, this being done with mildness of style and ingenious invention,
that I pull as much as possible to the truth, it will undoubtedly compose a cloth
of various and beautiful woven bows, which, after completion, such perfection and
beauty show, that it achieves the best end that is intended in the
written, which is to teach and delight together, as I have already said. Because
the writing unleashed in these books gives rise to the author being able to show
epic, lyrical, tragic, comic, with all those parts that enclose in
yes the most sweet and pleasant sciences of poetry and oratory; that
the epic can also be written in prose as well as in verse.
Chapter XLVIII. Where the canon continues the matter of the books of
chivalry, with other things worthy of your ingenuity
`` This is how your grace says, Lord Canon, '' said the priest, `` and for this
cause those who have hitherto composed
such books without warning of any good speech, or art
and rules by which they could be guided and become famous in prose, as they are
in verse the two princes of Greek and Latin poetry.
`` At least I, '' replied the canon, `` have had a certain temptation to
a book of chivalry, keeping in it all the points that I have
meaning; and if I have to confess the truth, I have written more than a hundred
leaves. And to make the experience if they corresponded to my estimate, the
I have communicated with passionate men of this legend, gifted and discreet, and
with other ignoramuses, who only attend to the pleasure of hearing nonsense, and
I have all found a pleasant approval; but, with all this, I have not
continued forward, thus because it seems to me that I do something alien to my profession,
as if to see that the number of the simple is greater than the number of the prudent; and
that, since it is better to be praised by the few wise men than
many fools, I do not want to subject myself to the confused judgment of the vanished vulgar,
who for the most part has to read such books. But what most
took him out of his hands, and even from the thought of finishing him, it was an argument
that I did with myself, taken from the comedies that are now represented,
saying: `` If these are used now, the imagined ones as well as the
history, all or most are known nonsense and things that do not carry
feet or head, and, with all that, the common people hear them with pleasure, and have them and
approves them for good, being so far from being it, and the authors who
make up and the actors who represent them say that they must be so, because
that is how the common people want them, and not otherwise; and that those with trace and
they follow the fable as art demands, they only serve for four discreet
who understand them, and everyone else is starving to understand their
artifice, and that it is better for them to earn from eating with the many, than
no opinion with the few, in this way it will become a book, after
having burned my eyebrows for keeping the aforementioned precepts, and I will come to
be the tailor of the cantillo ''. And although I have sometimes tried
persuade deluded actors to have the opinion they do, and
that more people will attract and more fame will earn by performing comedies that make
the art that not with the absurd ones, and they are so grasped and embodied in
his opinion, that there is no reason or evidence that he would remove them. I remember that
One day I said to one of these stubborn: 'Tell me, don't you remember that
few years that three tragedies were represented in Spain that composed a
famous poet of these kingdoms, which were such, that they admired,
cheered and suspended all who heard them, just as simple as
prudent, both the common and the chosen, and gave more money to the
Representatives of them three alone than thirty of the best than later here
have they been made? ''
your grace for La Isabela, La Filis and La Alejandra. '' '' For those I say
I replied. and see if they kept the precepts of art well, and if
by keeping them they stopped looking like what they were and to please everyone.
So the fault is not in the common people, who ask nonsense, but in those
who do not know how to represent something else. Yes, it was not nonsense The ingratitude
avenged, neither did La Numancia have him, nor was he found in that of the loving Merchant,
neither less in The Favorable Enemy, nor in some others than in some
learned poets have been composed, for his fame and renown, and for
gain of those who have represented them. '' And other things I added to these,
with which, in my opinion, I left him somewhat confused, but not satisfied or
convinced to get him out of his wrong thinking.
`` In matters it has come to your mercy, Lord Canon, '' said the
cure-, which has awakened in me an old rancor that I have with comedies
that now are used, such that it equals the one I have with the books of
knights; because, having to be the comedy, as it seems to Tulio,
mirror of human life, example of customs and image of truth,
those that are now represented are mirrors of nonsense, examples of
nonsense and images of lust. Because what greater nonsense can it be in
the subject that we try to leave a child in blankets at the first dinner
of the first act, and in the second come out already a bearded man? And that
greater than painting us a brave old man and a cowardly boy, a lackey
Rectoric, an adviser page, a Ganpan king and a mop princess? That
I will say, then, of the observance that they keep in the times when they can or
could happen the actions they represent, but I have seen comedy that
The first day began in Europe, the second in Asia, the third
ended in Africa, and that out of four days, the fourth ended in
America, and so would it have been done in all four parts of the world? What if
is that imitation is the main thing that comedy has to have, how is it
possible that satisfies any medium understanding that, pretending a
action that happens in the time of King Cucumber and Charlemagne, the same as in it
does the main person attribute to him that it was the emperor Heraclius, that
entered Jerusalem with the Cross, and the one who won the Holy House, like Godofre
of Bullón, having infinite years from one to the other; and founding the
comedy about a feigned thing, attributing truths from history to it, and mixing
pieces of others happened to different people and times, and this, not with
verisimilar traces, but with patently inexcusable errors of all points? AND
is the bad thing that there are ignorant people who say that this is the perfect thing, and that
the rest is looking for gullurías. Well, what if we come to divine comedies ?:
What false miracles they pretend in them, what apocryphal things and evil
understood, attributing to a saint the miracles of another! And even in the
humans dare to perform miracles, with no more respect or consideration than
It seems to them that such a miracle and appearance will be fine there, as they
they call, so that ignorant people admire themselves and come to the comedy; that everything
This is to the detriment of the truth and to the detriment of the stories, and even in
opprobrium of the Spanish mills; because foreigners, who with much
punctuality keep the laws of comedy, they consider us barbarians and
ignorant, seeing the absurdities and absurdities of which we do. And it wouldn't be
quite apologetic to say that the main attempt that the republics
well ordered they have, allowing comedies to be made public, it is for
entertain the community with some honest recreation, and amuse it at times
of the bad moods that idleness usually engenders; and that, well this is
get with any comedy, good or bad, there is no reason to put laws,
nor narrow those who compose them and represent them to do them as
should be done, because, as I have said, with anyone you get what with
they are intended. To which I would reply that this end would be achieved
much better, without comparison, with good comedies than with not
such; because, having heard the well-ordered and contrived comedy,
the listener would come out happy with mockery, taught with truths, admired
of the events, discreet with the reasons, warned with the lies, shrewd
with examples, angry against vice and in love with virtue; that
all these affections should arouse good comedy in the mind of the one who
I will listen, however rustic and clumsy it is; and of all impossibility is
impossible to stop cheering and entertaining, satisfying and satisfying, comedy
that all these parts have much more than the one that lacks them,
as for the most part they lack these that ordinarily now are
represent. And the poets that compose them are not to blame, because
there are some of them who know very well in what they err, and they know
extremely what they should do; but how comedies have been made
salable merchandise, they say, and they say the truth, that the representatives do not
They would buy them if they weren't of that kind; and so the poet tries
to settle with what the representative who has to pay for his work asks of him.
And that this is true is seen by many and infinite comedies that have
composed a very happy wit of these kingdoms, with so much gallantry, with so much
grace, with such elegant verse, with such good reasons, with such serious
sentences and, finally, so full of elocution and highness of style, that
he has the world full of his fame. And, for wanting to accommodate to the taste of the
representatives, have not all reached, as some have, to the point of
the perfection they require. So others compose them without looking at what they do,
that after being represented the recitors need to flee and
absent themselves, fearful of being punished, as they have been many times, for
having represented things to the detriment of some kings and to the disgrace of
some lineages. And all these inconveniences would cease, and still many others
more than I do not say, if there was in the Court an intelligent and
discreet to examine all comedies before they were performed (not
only those that were made in the Court, but all those that were wanted
represent in Spain), without which approval, stamp and signature, no
justice in its place allowed to represent some comedy; and, in this way,
comedians would be careful to send the comedies to court, and with
security could represent screens, and those who compose them would gaze
more care and study what they did, afraid of having to pass their works
by the rigorous examination of those who understand it; and in this way they would be done
good comedies and would happily achieve what they
intends: thus the entertainment of the people, as the opinion of the
ingenios de España, the interest and security of the recitors and the savings
of the care of punishments. And if he gave charge to another, or this same, that
examine the chivalric books that were again composed, no doubt
some could come out with the perfection that your grace has said,
enriching our language with the pleasant and precious treasure of the
eloquence, allowing old books to darken in the light of
the new ones that came out, for honest pastime, not just from the
idle, but the busiest; because it is not possible that the
armed bow, nor the human condition and weakness can be sustained without
some lawful recreation.
The canon and the priest arrived at this point in their conversation, when,
The barber coming forward, came to them, and said to the priest:
-Here, Mr. Graduate, is the place that I said was good for,
while we were napping, the oxen had fresh and abundant pasture.
"So it seems to me," replied the priest.
And, telling the canon what he planned to do, he too wanted to stay
with them, invited to the site of a beautiful valley that
offered. And, both to enjoy him and the conversation of the priest, who already
He was fond of, and because he knew more often the exploits of Don Quixote,
commanded some of his servants to go on sale, which not far from
there he was, and they would bring him what he had to eat, for everyone, because
he determined to nap in that place that afternoon; to which one of
his servants replied that the spare part, which must already be in
the sale, brought enough message to not force not to take from the sale more
what barley.
`` Well it is, '' said the canon, `` take all the horses there, and
bring back the chamomile.
While this was happening, seeing Sancho that he could speak to his master without
continuous assistance from the priest and the barber, who he considered suspects,
He came to the cage where his master was going, and he said:
-Sir, to relieve my conscience, I want to tell you what happens nearby
of his enchantment; and it is that these two who come here covered the
faces are the priest of our place and the barber; and I imagine they have given this
trace of carrying it this way, of pure envy that they have as yours
mercy is ahead of them in making famous deeds. Budget, then, this
truth, follow that he is not enchanted, but embittered and foolish. For proof of
which I want to ask you one thing; and if he answers me like I think he has
to respond, he will touch this deception with his hand and see how he is not delighted,
but upset judgment.
`` Ask what you want, son Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote.
I will satisfy and respond to all your will. And in what you say that those
who come and go with us are the priest and the barber, our
compatriots and acquaintances, it may well be that it seems that they are themselves;
but that they really are and in effect, do not believe that in any way.
What you have to believe and understand is that if they resemble them, as you say,
It must be that those who have enchanted me have taken that appearance and
likeness; because it is easy for the enchanters to take the figure that they are
whim, and our friends will have taken the dests, to give you the opportunity
that you think what you think, and put yourself in a maze of imaginations,
that you can't get out of it, even if you had Theseus's rope. And also what
have done so that I waver in my understanding, and not know how to
where does this damage come from; because if, on the one hand, you tell me that
accompany the barber and the priest of our town, and, on the other, I see myself
caged, and I know of myself that human forces, as they were not supernatural,
were not enough to cage me, what do you want me to say or think but
that the manner of my enchantment exceeds how many I have read in all
the stories about knights errant who have been enchanted?
I hoped that, well you can give yourself peace and quiet in this belief that they are the ones who
you say, because that's how they are like I'm Turkish. And, when it comes to wanting
ask me something, say, that I will answer you, even if you ask me from here to
morning.
-Vavame Our Lady! Sancho answered, giving a great voice. And it is
It is possible that your mercy is so hard of celebration, and so lacking in substance,
that I do not see that what I am telling you is pure truth, and that in this
prison and misfortune is malice more than charm? But then
Yes, I obviously want to prove to him that he is not delighted. But,
Tell me, so may God bring him out of this storm, and so he sees himself in the arms of my
Mrs. Dulcinea when you least think ...
"He has just conjured me," said Don Quixote, "and ask what you want;" that
I have already told you that I will answer you promptly.
"That is what I ask," replied Sancho; and what I want to know is to tell me, without
add or remove anything, but in all truth, as it is expected that the
all those who profess arms, like yours, have to say and say it
Your mercy, under the title of knights errant ...
"I say that I will not lie about anything," replied Don Quixote. Just
ask, that you really tire me with so many salutes, prayers and
preventions, Sancho.
-I say that I am sure of the goodness and truth of my master; and so, because
makes the point of our story, I ask, speaking dutifully, if at all
after your grace is caged and, in his opinion, delighted in this
cage, has come to want and will to make larger or smaller waters, as
it is often said.
-I don't understand that making water, Sancho; clarify yourself more, if you want me to
answer straight.
-Is it possible that he does not understand your mercy to make smaller waters or
greater? Well, at school they wean the boys with it. Well know
What do I mean if you feel like doing what is not excused?
-Ya, I understand you, Sancho! And so many times; and I still have it now. Kick me out
from this danger, that everything is not clean!
Chapter XLIX. Where it is about the discreet colloquium that Sancho Panza had
with his lord Don Quixote
"Ah," said Sancho; caught I have him! This is what I wanted to know, how
to the soul and as to life. Come here, sir: could you deny what is commonly
It is often said around when a person is ill-will: "I don't know what
has so-and-so, who neither eats, nor drinks, nor sleeps, nor responds on purpose to what
that they ask him, that he does not seem but that he is enchanted "? Where does he come from?
to take out that those who do not eat, drink, sleep, or do works
natural that I say, these such are enchanted; but not those who
they have the desire that your grace has and that they drink when they give it to them, and eat
when he has it, and responds to everything they ask him.
`` You say true, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` but I have already told you that there is
many forms of enchantments, and it could be that over time they had
moved from one to the other, and now it is used that the enchanted do everything
what I do, even though they didn't do it before. So against the use of
the times do not have to argue or what to do consequences. I know and I have
for me I am delighted, and this is enough for my safety
awareness; that it would make it very big if I thought it was not
delighted and let me be in this cage, lazy and cowardly, letting me down
the help that I could give to many needy and needy that from me
help and protection must have at the time of now precise and extreme need.
`` Well, with all that, '' Sancho replied, `` I say that, for greater abundance and
satisfaction, it would be good for your grace to try to get out of this jail,
that I force myself with all my power to facilitate it, and even to get it out of it, and
try again to climb on his good Rocinante, which also seems to be going
delighted, as it goes from malencholic and sad; and, done this, let's try another
you may be lucky enough to seek more adventures; and if it doesn't happen to us well, time
It remains for us to return to the cage, in which I promise, by law of good and
loyal squire, to lock myself up together with your grace, if
your grace so miserable, or I so simple, that I do not succeed in going out with
what I say.
"I am happy to do what you say, Sancho brother," replied Don
Quixote-; and when you see the opportunity to put my freedom into action, I will
I will obey in everything and for everything; but you, Sancho, you will see how you deceive yourself in the
knowledge of my misfortune.
In these talks the knight errant and the evil errant were entertained
squire, until they arrived where, already dismounted, the priest, the
Canon and the barber. Then the oxen from the cart was removed by the herder, and
let them walk at their width through that green and peaceful place, whose
freshness invited to want to enjoy it, not to people as enchanted as
Don Quixote, but to those as alert and discreet as his squire; the
who begged the priest to allow his master to leave the
cage, because if they didn't let him out, that prison wouldn't be so clean
as required the decency of such a gentleman as his master. Understood him
cure, and said that he would very willingly do what I asked if he did not fear that,
When his lord saw his freedom, he had to do his thing, and go where
people never saw him.
"I trust him about the escape," answered Sancho.
"And I and everything," said the canon; and more if he gives me the floor, like
Sir, not to depart from us until our will.
"Yes, I do," answered Don Quixote, who was listening to everything; how much more,
that he who is enchanted, like me, has no freedom to make his
person what he wants, because the one who loved it can make him not
move from one place in three centuries; and if he has fled, he will return in
flying. -And that, since this was so, they might as well let it go, and more, being
so for the benefit of all; and of not soltalle protested to them that he could not
stop exhausting the smell, if they did not deviate from there.
The canon took his hand, although he had them tied, and, under his good
faith and word, they uncaged him, that he rejoiced infinitely and greatly
way to see yourself outside the cage. And the first thing he did was stretch all over
the body, and then he went to where Rocinante was, and, patting him twice
on the haunches, he said:
-I still hope in God and in his blessed Mother, flower and mirror of horses,
that soon we have to see the two that we want; you, with your lord
slopes; and I, on top of you, exercising the office so that God cast me into
world.
And, saying this, Don Quixote, with Sancho in a remote part, withdrew from
where he came more relieved and with more desire to put into action what his
squire ordered.
The canon looked at him, and was amazed to see the strangeness of his great folly,
and that, as soon as he spoke and responded, he showed to have very beautiful
understanding: he only came to lose his temper, as other times
he has said, in treating him of chivalry. And so, moved with compassion, after
have all sat on the green grass, to wait for the replacement of the
Canon said to him:
-Is it possible, Senor Hidalgo, that the
bitter and idle reading of the chivalric books, which have made him
judgment so that he comes to believe that he is delighted, with other things
Jaez, as far from being true as the very lie of the
truth? And how is it possible that there is human understanding that is given to
understand that there have been in the world that infinity of Amadises, and that
mob of so many famous knights, so many emperor of Trabzon, so much
Felixmarte of Hircania, so many paffrons, so many walking maiden, so many
serpents, so many endriages, so many giants, so many unheard of adventures,
so many kinds of enchantments, so many battles, so many outrageous
encounters, so many bizarre costumes, so many princesses in love, so many
Count squires, so many funny dwarves, so much bill, so much commendation,
so many brave women; and finally so many crazy cases
as the books of chivalry contain? I know how to say that when
I read, as long as I do not put my imagination into thinking that they are all lies and
lightness, they give me some contentment; but when I realize what
They are, I find the best of them on the wall, and I would even find him in the fire if
near or present had him, as well as deserving of such a penalty, for being
false and deceitful, and outside the treatment demanded by common nature, and as
inventors of new sects and a new way of life, and as to whom gives
occasion for the ignorant vulgar to come to believe and consider true
as much nonsense as they contain. And they still have so much daring, that
dare to disturb the wits of the discreet and well-born noblemen,
as it is good to see for what they have done with your grace, because
have brought to terms that it is forced to lock him in a cage, and bring him
on a bullock cart, like someone who brings or carries a lion or a tiger,
from place to place, to win with him by letting them see him. Hey mister don
Quixote, feign yourself, and reduce yourself to the guild of discretion, and
know how to use the much that heaven was served to give, using the
very happy talent of his ingenuity in another letura that redounds in
harnessing your conscience and increasing your honor! And if still,
Out of his natural inclination, he would like to read books of exploits and
chivalry, read in the Sacred Scripture that of the Judges; that there you will find
great truths and facts as true as they are brave. A Viriatus had
Lusitania; a Caesar, Rome; a Hannibal, Carthage; an Alexander, Greece; a
Count Fernán González, Castilla; a Cid, Valencia; a Gonzalo Fernández,
Andalusia; a Diego García de Paredes, Estremadura; a Garci Pérez from
Vargas, Jerez; a Garcilaso, Toledo; a Don Manuel de León, Seville, whose
A lesson from your courageous deeds can entertain, teach, delight, and
admire the highest witnesses who read them. This one will be worthy reading
of the good understanding of your grace, my Lord Don Quixote, of which
will emerge a scholar in history, in love with virtue, taught in the
goodness, improved in manners, brave without recklessness, daring without
cowardice, and all this, to the honor of God, his profit, and the fame of
Stain; do, as I have learned, your mercy brings its beginning and origin.
Don Quixote was attentively listening to the canon's reasons; and,
when he saw that he had already put an end to them, after having been a
good looking space, he said:
-I seem to me, Mr. Hidalgo, that the talk of your grace has been directed
to want to make me understand that there have been no knights errant in the world,
and that all chivalric books are false, lying, damaging and
useless for the republic; and that I have done wrong in reading them, and worse in
believe them, and even worse in imitating them, having put myself to follow the very hard
profession of cavalry errant, which they teach, denying me that they have not
there have been in the world Amadises, neither Gaula nor Greece, nor all the other
gentlemen that the scriptures are full.
-Everything is to the letter as your grace is relating it -said to
the canon is seasoned.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-Your grace also added, saying that they had done me a lot of damage
such books, for they had returned my senses and put me in a cage, and
that it would be better for me to make the amendment and change my letter, reading other more
true and that best delight and teach.
"Yes," said the canon.
`` Well, '' replied Don Quixote, `` I find on my own that he without judgment and
enchanted is your grace, because he has been saying so many blasphemies
against a thing so received in the world, and held so true, that
whoever denied it, as your grace denies it, deserved the same penalty as
Your grace says that you give to books when you read them and they make you angry. Because
want to imply to anyone that Amadís was not in the world, nor all the
other adventurous knights with which stories are full, it will be
wanting to persuade that the sun does not shine, nor does the yelo cool, nor the earth
sustains; because what ingenuity can there be in the world that can persuade
to another that it was not true about the Infanta Floripes and Guy of Burgundy, and
of Fierabrás with the Mantible bridge, which happened in the time of
Charlemagne; What do I vote for that is as true as it is now in the daytime? What if
It is a lie, it must also be that there was no Hector, nor Achilles, nor the
Trojan War, nor the Twelve Peers of France, nor King Artus of
Ingagland, who has been turned into a raven until now and awaits him in his
kingdom at times. And they will also dare to say that the
history of Guarino Mezquino, and that of the demand for the Holy Grail, and that they are
apocryphal the loves of Don Tristan and Queen Iseo, as those of Geneva and
Lanzarote, having people who almost remember having seen the owner
Quintañona, who was the best wine pourer that Great Britain had.
And this is so eager, that I remember that I was telling myself one of my parts
of my father, when he saw some owner with reverend headdresses: '' That one,
grandson, he looks like the owner Quintañona ''; Where do I argue that he owed it?
of knowing her or, at least, he must have seen some portrait
yours. Well, who can deny that the story of Pierres and the
beautiful Magalona, ​​because even to this day one sees in the armory of the kings the
peg with which he returned to the wooden horse, on which was the brave
Pierres in the air, which is a little bigger than a cart rudder? AND
next to the peg is Babieca's chair, and in Roncesvalles is the
Roldán's horn, size like a large beam: from which it is inferred that there was
Twelve Peers, that there were Pierres, that there were Cides, and other gentlemen
similar,
what people say
that they go on their adventures.
If not, tell me also that it is not true that he was a knight errant
brave Lusitanian Juan de Merlo, who went to Burgundy and fought in the
city ​​of Ras with the famous lord of Charní, called Mosén Pierres, and
later, in the city of Basel, with Mosén Enrique de Remestán, leaving
of both companies, winner and full of honorable fame; and the adventures and
challenges that also ended up in Burgundy the brave Spaniards Pedro
Barba and Gutierre Quijada (of whose lineage I mean by a straight line of
male), defeating the children of the count of San Polo. Deny me, I likewise,
that Don Fernando de Guevara did not go to seek adventures in Germany, where
They fought with Michael George, a knight of the house of the Duke of Austria;
Say that the jousts of Suero de Quiñones, del Paso, were mocked; the
companies of mosén Luis de Falces against don Gonzalo de Guzmán, caballero
Castilian, with many other feats done by Christian knights,
of these and of foreign kingdoms, so authentic and true, that it turned
to say that the one who denied them would lack all reason and good speech.
The canon was amazed to hear Don Quixote's mixture of
truths and lies, and to see the news he had of all those things
concerning and concerning the deeds of his errant cavalry; and so,
answered:
-I cannot deny, Mr. Don Quixote, that something of what
your grace has said, especially as regards the knights
Spanish andantes; and I also want to concede that there were Twelve Pairs of
France, but I don't want to believe that they did all those things that he
Archbishop Turpín dellos writes; because the truth of it is that they were
knights chosen by the kings of France, whom they called peers by
be all equal in value, quality and courage; at least, if not
they were, it was reason that they were and it was like a religion that is now
use of Santiago or Calatrava, which is assumed that those who profess it
they must be, or must be, brave, brave and well-born knights; and,
As now they say Knight of San Juan, or of Alcántara, they said in that
time knight of the Twelve Pairs, because there were not twelve of the same
for this military religion they were chosen. In what there was Cid there is no
doubt, not least Bernardo del Carpio, but that they did the feats that
they say, I think there is a very large one. In the other of the peg than yours
mercy says of Count Pierres, and that he is next to Babieca's chair in the
armory of kings, I confess my sin; that I am so ignorant, or so
short-sighted, that, although I have seen the chair, I have not seen the
peg, and more being as great as your grace has said.
"Well, there it is, without a doubt," replied Don Quixote; and, for more signs,
They say that it is in a cowhide cover, because it does not get moldy.
"Anything can be," replied the canon; but, by the orders that I received,
that I do not remember having seen it. But, since I grant that it is there, no
that is why I force myself to believe the stories of so many Amadises, nor those of so many
mob of gentlemen as they tell us there; nor is it reason that a
man like your grace, so honored and of such good parts, and endowed with
such a good understanding, it is implied that so many and so many
strange follies like the ones written in the crazy books of
knights.
Chapter L. Of the discreet altercations that Don Quixote and the Canon
they had, with other events
-Well there is that! Don Quixote answered. The books that are in print
with the license of kings and with the approval of those to whom it is
sent, and that with general pleasure are read and celebrated by the great
and the boys, the poor and the rich, the learned and
ignorant, of commoners and gentlemen, finally, of all kinds of
people, of whatever state and condition, were they to be
lie?; and more wearing so much appearance of truth, because they tell us the
father, mother, country, relatives, age, place and deeds,
point by point and day by day, that such a gentleman made, or gentlemen
they made. Quiet Your Grace, do not say such blasphemy (and believe me
I advise in this what you should do as discreet), but read them, and you will see
the taste you get from your legend. If not, tell me: is there greater contentment than
see, as if to say: here now a great
lake of fish boiling bubbling, and they are swimming and crossing it
many snakes, snakes and lizards, and many other kinds of animals
fierce and frightful, and that from the middle of the lake comes a very sad voice that
says: `` You, gentleman, whoever you are, that the fearful lake is
looking, if you want to achieve the good that under these black waters
cover up, show the courage of your strong chest and throw yourself in the middle of
black and burning liquor; because if you don't, you won't be worth seeing
the high wonders that enclose and contain the seven castles of
the seven fades that lie beneath this blackness? '' And what, just the
gentleman has not finished hearing the fearful voice, when, without going further into
accounts with him, without considering the danger to which he puts himself, and even
without shedding the grief of his strong weapons, entrusting himself to God
and his mistress, he throws himself in the middle of the boiling lake, and, when he is not tasting
nor does he know where to stop, he is among some flowery fields, with whom
the Elysees have nothing to do with anything? There it seems to him that heaven
it is more transparent, and that the sun shines with newer clarity; offer to
the eyes a peaceful forest of so green and leafy trees composed,
that cheers the sight of its vegetables, and entertains the ears the sweet and not
learned song of the small, infinite and painted birds that
the intricate bouquets are crossing. Here he discovers a stream whose
cool waters, that liquid crystals seem, run over small sands
and white stones, like sifted gold and pure pearls; there go
an artful fountain of variegated jasper and smooth composite marble; here see
another to the brutesque adorned, where the small shells of the clams, with
the crooked white and yellow snail houses, arranged in order
messy, mixed between them pieces of shining glass and
twisted emeralds, they do a varied work, so that art,
imitating nature, it seems that he conquers her there. There suddenly
discovers a strong castle or colorful fortress, whose walls are made of
solid gold, the battlements of diamonds, the doors of hyacinths; Finally,
he is of such admirable composure that, being the matter of which he is
formed no less than diamonds, carbuncles, rubies, pearls,
gold and emeralds, their workmanship is more precious. And is there more to see,
after having seen this, what to see coming out of the castle door a
a good number of maids, whose finery and showy gowns, if I were to wear
Now to tell them as the stories tell us, it would be never ending; and
then take the one that seemed main of all by the hand of the daring
knight who threw himself into the fervent lake, and carry him, without speaking
word, inside the rich fortress or castle, and make him undress as his
mother bore him, and bathe him with warm waters, and then anoint him all with
fragrant ointments, and dress him in a very thin rye shirt, all
fragrant and perfumed, and another maid would come and throw a shawl over the
shoulders, which, at least, they say is usually worth a city, and even
plus? What is it to see, then, when they tell us that, after all this, they lead him to
another room, where the tables are set, with so much concert, that
suspense and admired ?; What, seeing him pour water on his hands, all amber and
fragrant distilled flowers ?; What, making him sit on a chair
ivory?; What, to see him serve all the maidens, keeping a wonderful
be quiet?; What, to bring you so much difference in delicacies, so tasty
stews, who does not know the appetite to which one should reach out? What will be
hear the music that sounds as you eat, without knowing who sings it or
where does it sound? And, after the finished meal and the tables set up,
the gentleman to remain leaning on the saddle, and perhaps peeling his
teeth, as is customary, to enter at the wrong time through the door of the room another
much more beautiful maiden than any of the former, and to sit beside
of the knight, and begin to give him an account of which castle it is, and of
how she is enchanted in him, with other things that suspend the knight
and do you admire the readers who are reading your story? I do not want to lengthen
more on this, since it can be inferred that any part that is read,
of any knight errant story, it must cause delight and wonder
to anyone who will read it. And your grace believe me, and, as again I have
That said, read these books, and you will see how the melancholy that
have, and they improve the condition, if it is bad. I know how to say
that, after I am a knight errant, I am brave, restrained, liberal,
well-bred, generous, courteous, daring, soft, patient, suffering from
jobs, prisons, charms; and, although it has been so little that I saw myself
locked in a cage, like crazy, I think, for the value of my arm,
favoring the sky and not being contrary to fortune, in a few days
see me king of some kingdom, where I can show gratitude and
liberality that my chest contains. That, my faith, sir, the poor man is
unable to show the virtue of liberality with none, although
possessed it in the highest degree; and the gratitude that only consists of the desire
it is a dead thing, as faith is dead without works. This is why I would like the
fortune offered me a chance to make me emperor, for
show my chest doing good to my friends, especially this poor
Sancho Panza, my squire, who is the best man in the world, and would like
give him a county that I have many days promised, but I fear that
he must not have the ability to govern his state.
Almost these last words Sancho heard from his master, to whom he said:
"May your grace, Mr. Don Quixote, work to give me that county, so
promised of your mercy as expected of me, that I promise not
I lack my ability to govern him; and, when I am missing, I have heard
say that there are men in the world who lease the estates of
the lords, and they give them a little every year, and they take care of the
government, and the man is on his feet, enjoying the income that he
they give, without being cured of anything else;
And so I will, and I will not notice as much as, but then I will
I will give up everything, and I will enjoy my income like a duke, and there they will.
`` That, brother Sancho, '' said the canon, `` understand yourself as to enjoying the
rent; However, when administering justice, the lord of the state must attend,
and here comes skill and good judgment, and mainly good
intention to hit; that if this is missing in the principles, they will always go
wrong means and ends; and so God usually helps the good desire of the
simple as disadvantaging the bad guy of the discreet.
"I don't know those philosophies," answered Sancho Panza. but I only know how fast
I had the county as I would know how to govern it; how much soul do I have?
another, and as much body as anyone else, and I would be as king of my state as
each of his; and, being so, he would do what he wanted; and, doing what
I wanted, I would do my pleasure; and, doing my pleasure, I would be happy; and in
being content, one has nothing more to wish for; and, having no more than
wish, it's over; and the state come, and to God and let's see each other, as a blind man said
to another.
-These are not bad philosophies, as you say, Sancho; but, with all that,
there is much to be said on this county matter.
To which Don Quixote replied:
- I do not know that there is more to say; I am only guided by the example that he gives me
great Amadís de Gaula, who made his squire count of the Firm Island; and
Thus, I can, without scruples of conscience, make Sancho Panza count, who
He is one of the best squires a knight-errant has ever had.
The canon was amazed at the concerted nonsense that Don Quixote
he had said, in the way he had painted the adventure of the Knight of the
Lago, from the impression that the thoughtful lies of the
books he had read; and, finally, he admired Sancho's foolishness,
who so eagerly desired to reach the county that his master had
promised.
Already in this, the servants of the canon returned, who had gone for sale by
the spare part, and, making a table out of a rug and green
grass of the meadow, in the shade of some trees they sat, and ate there,
because the herder did not lose the comfort of that place, as has been said.
And, while they were eating, they heard a loud roar and a sound of
shearing, that among some brambles and thick bushes that were there together
it sounded, and at the same moment they saw a
beautiful goat, all the skin stained black, white and brown. After her
a goatherd came shouting at him, and saying words to his use, so that he
stop, or return to the flock. The fugitive goat, fearful and terrified,
he came to the people, as if to favor themselves, and there he stopped. Came the
goatherd, and, seizing her by the horns, as if capable of speech and
understanding, he said:
-Ah cerrera, cerrera, Manchada, Manchada, and how are you doing these days of
lame foot! What wolves scare you, daughter? Won't you tell me what this is, beautiful?
But what can it be but that you are female, and you cannot be calm; that
ill be your condition, and that of all those whom you imitate! Come back,
come back, friend; that if not so happy, at least, you will be safer in
your sheepfold, or with your companions; what if you have
save and direct you walk so unguided and so misguided, how can they
stop them?
They gave the goatherd's words glad to those who heard them,
especially to the canon, who said:
-For your life, brother, that you calm down a little and do not worry about
to return that goat so quickly to its flock; that, well, she is female, like you
you say, he must follow his different nature, no matter how much you put yourself
hinder it. Take this bite and drink once, with which you will temper the
anger, and meanwhile, the goat will rest.
And saying this and poking the loins of a rabbit with the tip of the knife
cold meat, it was all one. The goatherd took it and thanked it; drank and calmed down, and
then he said:
-I would not want that because I spoke with this vermin so brained, I
they had your favors for a simple man; that in truth they do not lack
of mystery the words that I said. I am rustic, but not so much that no
understand how to deal with men and beasts.
`` I think that very well, '' said the priest, `` that I already know from experience that
The mountains breed scholars and the shepherds' huts house philosophers.
"At least, sir," replied the goatherd, "they welcome chastened men; and
so that you believe this truth and touch it with your hand, even if it seems that
without being begged I invite you, if you do not get angry with it and you want, gentlemen, a
briefly, lend me an attentive ear, I will tell you a truth that proves what
that that man (pointing to the priest) has said, and mine.
To this Don Quixote replied:
-To see that this case has an I do not know what shadow of adventure of
cavalry, I, for my part, will listen to you, brother, very willingly, and so
will do all these gentlemen, for how much they have of discretion and of being
friends of curious novelties that suspend, cheer and entertain the
senses, as, without a doubt, I think your story has to do.
So begin, friend, we will all listen.
"I take out mine," said Sancho; that I go to that stream with this pie,
where I plan to be fed up for three days; because I have heard my lord don say
Quixote that the knight-errant squire has to eat, when he is
I will offer, until I can no longer, because they are usually offered to enter
perhaps because of a jungle so intricate that they can't get out of it in six
days; And if the man is not fed up, or if the saddlebags are provided, there he
it may remain, as it often does, made mummy flesh.
`` You are right, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` go where you want, and
eat what you can; that I am already satisfied, and I only need to give the
soul your refreshment, as I will give it listening to the story of this good man.
"That is how we will all give them to ours," said the canon.
And then he begged the goatherd to begin what he had promised. The
goatherd slapped the goat twice on the back, which by the horns
had, telling him:
-Lie down next to me, Manchada, what time we have left to return to
our implement.
It seems that the goat understood it, because, as its owner sat down, he stretched out
she with him very calmly, and, looking at his face, implied
who was attentive to what the goatherd was saying, which began his
story this way:
Chapter LI. Which is about what the goatherd told all those who were carrying
to don Quixote
- «Three leagues from this valley is a village that, although small, is one of the most
rich that are in all these contours; in which there was a very
honest, and so much so that, although it is annexed to being rich to be honest,
It was him because of the virtue he had rather than the wealth he achieved. More what
made him happier, as he said, was having a daughter of such great
beauty, rare discretion, grace and virtue, that he who knew and
looked, he was amazed to see the shocked parts with which the sky and the
nature had enriched her. As a child she was beautiful, and always was
growing in beauty, and at the age of sixteen she was most beautiful. The
fame of her beauty began to spread throughout the surrounding areas
villages, what do I say for the surrounding ones, if it extended to the
remote cities, and even entered through the halls of kings, and through the
ears of all kinds of people; that, as a strange thing, or as in the image of
miracles, did they come from everywhere to see her? Her father kept her, and she kept
she; that there are no padlocks, guards or locks that better keep a
maiden than those of proper modesty.
»The wealth of the father and the beauty of the daughter moved many, from
people as strangers, to be asked for a woman; but he, as a
who had to have such a rich jewel, was confused, without knowing
determine to whom he would deliver it of the infinities that bothered him. AND,
Among the many who had such good wishes, I was one, to whom they gave
many and great hopes of good success knowing that the father knew
who I was, the natural being of the same town, clean in blood, in the age
flourishing, on a very rich estate and in no less finished ingenuity. With
all these same parts was also requested by another from the same town, which was
cause of suspending and balancing the will of the father, whom
it seemed that with any of us her daughter was well employed; and by
get out of this confusion, he determined to tell Leandra, who is called the
rich that in misery has put me, warning that, since we were both
the same, it was right to leave it to the will of his beloved daughter to choose his
taste: something worthy of imitation of all parents who love their children
put in state: I am not saying that they let them choose in mean and bad things,
but that they propose them good ones, and of the good ones, that they choose to their liking.
I don't know what Leandra had; I only know that the father entertained us
both with the young age of his daughter and with general words, that neither
they forced, nor did they disobey us. Call my competitor Anselmo, and I
Eugenio, because you go with news of the names of the people who in this
tragedy is contained, the end of which is still pending; but it is well left
understand that it will be ruined.
»At this time, a Vicente de la Rosa, the son of a
poor farmer from the same place; which Vincent came from the Italies, and from
other various parts, of being a soldier. Led him from our place, being
a boy up to twelve years old, a captain who with his company over there hit the mark
to pass, and the boy returned from there to twelve others, dressed as the soldiery,
painted in a thousand colors, filled with a thousand crystal charms and subtle chains of
steel. Today a gala was put on and tomorrow another; but all subtle, painted,
of little weight and less I take. The farm people, who are malicious in themselves, and
giving him the leisure place is the same malice, he noticed it, and he counted point by point
their finery and medals, and found that the dresses were three, of different
colors, with their garters and stockings; but he made so many stews and
inventions of them, that if they were not told, there would be someone who would swear that
had sampled more than ten pairs of dresses and more than twenty
plumages. And it does not seem impertinence and too much this that of the dresses I go
counting, because they play a good part in this story.
»He sat on a bench that is in our square under a large poplar tree, and
there he had our mouths open, awaiting the exploits that
was counting. There was no land in the entire world that I had not seen, nor
battle where it would not have been found; had died more Moors than has
Morocco and Tunisia, and entered into more unique challenges, as he said,
that Gante and Luna, Diego García de Paredes and a thousand others he named; and of
all had come out with victory, without having had a single drop spilled
of blood. On the other hand, it showed signs of injuries that, although not
made us understand that they were arquebuses given in different
reunions and factions. Finally, with an unseen arrogance, he called from
you to his equals and to the same ones who knew him, and said that his father was
his arm, his lineage, his works, and that under being a soldier, the king himself
he owed nothing. Added to these arrogances was being a bit of a musician and playing
a guitar ripped, in a way that some said he made it
talk; but her graces did not stop here, she was also a poet, and
Thus, of each childish thing that happened in the town, composed a romance of league
and a half of writing.
»This soldier, then, that I have painted here, this Vicente de la Rosa, this
Bravo, this gallant, this musician, this poet was seen and looked at many times
of Leandra, from a window of her house that had a view of the square.
She fell in love with the tinsel of their showy suits, she was enchanted by his romances, which
of each one who composed gave twenty transfers, the
feats that he himself had referred to, and, finally, that so the devil
She must have ordered it, she fell in love with him, before she did with him
was born presumption of requesting it. And, as in the cases of love there is no
none that is more easily fulfilled than the one who has on his part the
wish of the lady, Leandra and Vicente easily agreed; and,
first that any of his many suitors realized his
wish, she had already fulfilled him, having left the house of her beloved and
beloved father, whose mother does not have one, and leaving the village with the
soldier, who came out with more success from this enterprise than from all the many
that he applied.
»The whole village admired the event, and even all those who reported it
they had; I was suspended, Anselmo, astonished, the sad father, his
affronted relatives, solicitous justice, the ready squad;
the roads were taken, the forests and all that there was searched, and, at the
After three days, they found the fickle Leandra in a cave of a
mount, naked in shirt, without much money and precious jewels that
his house had taken out. They returned her to the presence of the injured father;
they asked him his misfortune; confessed without pressure that Vicente de la Roca
had cheated, and under his word that he was her husband persuaded her that
leave his father's house; that he would lead her to the richest and most vicious
a city that existed in the entire world universe, which was Naples; and that she,
badly warned and worse deceived, she had believed him; and, stealing from his father, he
gave him the same night that he had missed; and that he led her to a rough
mount, and locked her in that cave where they had found her. Also counted
as the soldier, without taking away his honor, stole everything he had, and left it in
that cave and left: an event that once again made everyone admire.
»Hard we were led to believe the waiter's continence, but she affirmed it with
so many, that they were part so that the heartbroken father consoled himself,
not taking account of the riches they brought him, since they had left him to
his daughter with the jewel which, if once lost, leaves no hope that
never be charged. The same day that Leandra appeared, her father disappeared from
our eyes, and led her to lock her up in a monastery of a village that is
Here near, hoping that time will waste some part of the bad opinion
in which your daughter got. Leandra's few years served as an excuse for
her fault, at least with those who had no interest in her having
it was bad or good; but those who knew his discretion and much
understanding they did not attribute their sin to ignorance, but to their
and to the natural inclination of women, who, for the most part, tend to
be foolish and poorly composed.
"With Leandra locked up, Anselmo's eyes went blind, at least without
have something to look at that would make you happy; mine in darkness, without light
that to any thing of pleasure it led them; with the absence of Leandra,
our sadness grew, our patience faded, we cursed the finery
of the soldier and abhorred the little modesty of Leandra's father.
Finally, Anselmo and I agreed to leave the village and come to
this valley, where he, grazing a large number of his sheep
own, and I a large herd of goats, also mine, spent our lives
between the trees, giving way to our passions, or singing together
praise or vituperation of the beautiful Leandra, or sighing alone and alone
communicating with the sky our complaints.
"In our imitation, many other of Leandra's suitors have
come to these rough mountains, using the same exercise ours; and they are
so many, that it seems that this site has become pastoral Arcadia,
as it is the height of shepherds and sheepfolds, and there is no part in it where
the name of the beautiful Leandra is heard. He curses her and calls her
whimsical, varied and dishonest; the former condemns it for being easy and light; size
absolve and forgive, and such justice and reproach; one celebrates its beauty,
another denies her condition, and, in short, everyone dishonors her, and everyone
adore, and madness is so widespread that there are those who complain about
disdain without ever having spoken it, and even those who lament and feel the
rabid disease of jealousy, which she never gave to anyone; because like
I have already said, before his sin was known than his desire. There is no rock hole,
nor stream margin, nor tree shade that is not occupied by some shepherd
let their misadventures in the air count; the echo repeats Leandra's name
wherever it can be formed: Leandra the mountains resound, Leandra
the streams murmur, and Leandra has us all suspended and enchanted,
hoping without hope and fearing without knowing what we fear. Between these
crazy, the one who shows that he has less and more judgment is my competitor
Anselmo, who, having so many other things to complain about, only
complaint of absence; and to the sound of a rabel, who admirably plays, with
verses where he shows his good understanding, singing he complains. I follow another
easier way, and in my opinion the most successful, which is to say badly
women's lightness, their inconstancy, their double treatment, their
dead promises, his broken faith, and, finally, the little speech that
They have to know how to place their thoughts and intentions that they have. And this
It was the occasion, gentlemen, of the words and reasons that I said to this goat
when I arrived here; that because I am female I have little, although it is the best
of all my implement. This is the story I promised to tell you; yes i have been in
to tell it neatly, I will not be to serve you short: near here I have my
majada, and in it I have fresh milk and very tasty cheese, with other
various and seasoned fruits, not less pleasing to the eye than to the taste.
Chapter LII. Of the quarrel that Don Quixote had with the goatherd, with the
rare adventure of the disappointing, to whom he gave a happy end at the cost of his
sweat
General relish caused the tale of the goatherd to all who listened to it.
had; he was especially greeted by the canon, who with strange curiosity
noticed the way he had told her, so far from looking rustic
goatherd how close to being a discreet courtier; and so he said there was
The priest said very well in saying that the mountains raised scholars. All know
they offered Eugenio; but the one who was most liberal in this was Don
Quixote, who told him:
-By the way, brother goatherd, that if I were able to
start some adventure, that then later set me on my way because you
you had it good; that I took out of the monastery, where, without a doubt,
must be against her will, to Leandra, despite the abbess and
who would like to interfere with it, and put it in your hands, so that
do it at your will and mood, keeping, but, the
laws of chivalry, which command that no maiden be dated
some mess; although I hope in God Our Lord that he will not
so powerful is the strength of a malicious charmer that
another better-intentioned charmer, and by then I promise you my favor and
It helps, as my profession requires me, which is none other than to favor the
helpless and needy.
The goatherd looked at him, and as he saw Don Quixote with such bad fur and taste,
He was amazed and asked the barber, who was near him:
-Sir, who is this man, how tall is he and how does he speak?
`` Who is it to be, '' replied the barber, `` if not the famous Don Quixote de la
Stain, debunker of grievances, straightener of one-eyed, the protection of
maidens, the astonishment of the giants and the victor of battles?
`` That resembles to me, '' replied the goatherd, `` what is read in the books of
knights errant, who did all that of this man your mercy
He says; since for me I have, or that your grace mocks, or that this
Gentle man must have empty the chambers of the head.
"You are a great rogue," Don Quixote said at this time; and you are the
empty and diminished, that I am fuller than ever was the very
You fucking whore who gave birth to you.
And, saying and doing, he snatched some bread that he had next to him, and found
him to the goatherd in all his face, with such fury, that he riveted the
nose; but the goatherd, who did not know of mockery, seeing how many you will see
they mistreated him, without respect for the carpet, or the tablecloths, or
all those who were eating, jumped on Don Quixote, and, grabbing him
of the neck with both hands, I would not hesitate to drown him, if Sancho Panza did not
arrived at that point, and grabbed him by the back and ran into him
from the table, breaking plates, breaking cups and spilling and scattering
how much in her was. Don Quixote, who was free, went to get on
about the goatherd; Who, full of blood on his face, ground to the kicks of
Sancho, he was crawling around for a knife on the table to make some
bloody revenge, but the canon and the priest hindered him; more him
The barber did so that the goatherd caught Don Quixote under him,
on which it rained so many milestones, that from the poor man's face
Knight rained as much blood as his.
The canon and the priest burst out laughing, the squads of
joy, they buzzed each other, as they do to dogs when in
pendency are locked; only Sancho Panza despaired, because he did not know
could get rid of a servant of the canon, who hindered him that his master did not
help yourself.
In resolution, being all in rejoicing and celebration, but the two thumping
carp, they heard the sound of a trumpet, so sad that it made them
turn their faces to where they thought it sounded; but the one I know the most
The uproar of hearing him was Don Quixote, who, although he was under the
goatherd, fed up against his will and more than moderately crushed, said to him:
-Demon brother, it is not possible for you to stop being one, because you have had
Courage and strength to hold mine, I beg you to make truces, no more
for an hour; because the painful are from that trumpet that our
ears reaches it seems to me that he is calling me to some new adventure.
The goatherd, who was already tired of grinding and being ground, then left him, and
Don Quixote stood up, also turning his face to where the son was
heard, and saw untimely that by a reclining many men dressed in
white, by way of disciplinarians.
It was the case that that year the clouds had denied their dew to the earth, and
processions, prayers and prayers were held in all parts of that region.
disciplines, asking God to open the hands of his mercy and
it rained; and for this purpose the people of a village that were there together
was coming in procession to a devout hermitage that on a side of that valley
there was.
Don Quixote, who saw the strange costumes of the disciplinarians, without passing
from the memory of the many times he had seen them, he imagined
that it was a matter of adventure, and that he only touched, like a knight errant,
undertaking it; and this imagination confirmed him more to think than an image that
wore covered in mourning was some main lady that they wore by
force those rumblings and insane miscreants; and how this fell
in their minds, with great lightness he attacked Rocinante, who was grazing
He was walking, removing the bit from the saddle and the bridle, and at one point
confronted, and, asking Sancho for his sword, climbed over Rocinante and embraced his
shield, and said in a loud voice to all who were present:
-Agora, courageous company, you will see how much it matters that there is in the world
knights who profess the order of the errant knighthood; now I say that
veredes, in the freedom of that good lady who goes there captive, if she
Knights-errant are to esteem.
And, in saying this, he squeezed Rocinante's thighs, because spurs don't
I had, and, at full gallop, because a drawn race is not read in all this
true story that Rocinante never gave, he went to meet the
disciplinarians, even if they were the priest and the canon and barber to detenelle;
but it was not possible for them, much less the voices that Sancho
gave, saying:
"Where are you going, Mr. Don Quixote?" What the hell is he wearing on his chest?
incite us to go against our Catholic faith? Warn, bad luck to me, that that
It is a procession of disciplinarians, and that the lady they carry on the
peana is the most blessed image of the Virgin without blemish; look, sir, what
What does he do, that this time he can say that it is not what he knows.
Sancho was tired in vain, because his master was so determined to reach the
skewered and free the mourning lady, who did not hear a word; and, although
heard her, she would not return, if the king commanded her to. So he arrived at the
procession, and stopped Rocinante, who already had a desire to quiet down a bit,
And, in a troubled and hoarse voice, he said:
-You, who, perhaps because you are not good, cover up your faces, listen and
listen to what I want to say to you.
The first to stop were those with the image; and one of
the four clergymen who sang the ledanías, seeing the strange catadura
Don Quixote, Rocinante's weakness, and other laughing circumstances that
noticed and discovered in Don Quixote, he responded by saying:
-Mr. Brother, if you want to tell us something, say it quickly, because they are leaving
these brothers opening the meats, and we cannot, nor is it a reason that we
let us stop to hear something, if it is no longer so brief that in two words it is
say.
`` I will say so in one, '' replied Don Quixote, `` and it is this:
free that beautiful lady, whose tears and sad countenance make clear
You show that you are carrying her against her will and that some notorious mess
you have dated him; and I, who was born in the world to disfavor such
grievances, I will not allow a single step forward to pass without giving it the desired
freedom you deserve.
On these reasons, all who heard them fell that Don Quixote must have
be some crazy man, and they laughed very heartily; whose laugh was to put
gunpowder to Don Quixote's anger, because, without saying another word,
the sword, lashed out at the litter. One of those who wore them, leaving
charging his companions, he went out to meet Don Quixote, hoisting
a fork or cane with which he supported the litter while
rested; and, receiving in her a great stab that he threw don
Quixote, with which he made two parts, with the last third, which remained
in his hand, he struck Don Quixote with such a blow over his shoulder, for the same
side of the sword, which could not cover the shield against villain force, which
poor Don Quixote came to the ground very badly.
Sancho Panza, who, panting, was reaching for him, seeing him fallen, shouted
his grinder not to give him another stick, because he was a poor gentleman
delighted, that he had not hurt anyone in all the days of his life.
But what stopped the villain was not the voices of Sancho, but seeing
that Don Quixote had neither foot nor hand; and thus, believing that he had died,
with haste he raised his tunic to the belt, and fled through the campaign as
a fallow deer.
At this point all of Don Quixote's company arrived where he
was; and more those of the procession, who saw them come running, and with
they the crews with their crossbows, feared some bad event, and
They all made a whirlpool around the image; and, raised the
hoods, wielding the disciplines, and the clergymen the ciriales, waited
the assault with determination to defend themselves, and even offend, if they could,
its attackers; but fortune did better than thought, because
Sancho did nothing but throw himself on the body of his lord,
making over him the most painful and smiling cry in the world, believing that
was dead.
The priest was acquainted with another priest who was coming in the procession, whose
The knowledge put the conceived fear of the two squadrons to rest. The
The first priest gave the second, for two reasons, an account of who was Don
Quixote, and so he and the entire mob of disciplinarians went to see if
the poor gentleman was dead, and they heard that Sancho Panza, with tears
in the eyes, it said:
-Oh flower of the cavalry, that with just one club you finished the race
of your so well spent years! Oh honor of your lineage, honor and glory of
all the Stain, and even the whole world, which, lacking you in it, will remain
full of evildoers, unafraid of being punished for their wrongdoings!
Oh liberal over all the Alexandros, for for only eight months of
service you had given me the best island that the sea girdles and surrounds! Oh
humble with the proud and arrogant with the humble,
dangers, affronted, in love without a cause, imitator of the
good, scourge of the bad, enemy of the bad, well, gentleman
andante, that's all you can say!
With the voices and moans of Sancho Don Quixote revived, and the first word
what he said was:
-He who lives absent from you, sweet Dulcinea, to greater miseries than
these are subject. Help me, Sancho friend, to get on the car
delighted, that I am no longer to press Rocinante's chair, because I have
All this shoulder shattered
`` I will do that very willingly, my lord, '' replied Sancho, `` and let's go back to
my village in the company of these gentlemen, who wish their good, and there we will give
order to make another exit that is of more profit and fame.
`` You say well, Sancho, '' replied Don Quixote, `` and it will be great prudence to leave
pass the bad influence of the stars that now runs.
The canon and the priest and barber told him that he would do well to do what
what did he say; and thus, having taken great pleasure in the simplicities of
Sancho Panza, they put Don Quixote in the car, as he used to come. The
The procession re-ordered itself and continued on its way; the goatherd is
said goodbye to everyone; the squads did not want to go forward, and the priest
He paid them what they were owed. The canon asked the priest to notify him of the
event of Don Quixote, if he healed of his madness or if he continued in it, and with
this took leave to continue his journey. Anyway, they all divided and
They parted, leaving alone the priest and barber, Don Quixote and Panza, and the
good of Rocinante, who to everything he had seen was with so much
patience as its master.
The herder harnessed his oxen and arranged Don Quixote on a bundle of hay, and
with his customary phlegm he followed the path that the priest wanted, and after
six days they reached the village of Don Quixote, where they entered the middle
of the day, which happened to be Sunday, and the people were all in the square,
half of which the chariot of Don Quixote crossed. They all came to see what
who was coming in the car, and when they met their compatriot, they were
marveled, and a boy came running to tell his mistress already
his niece that his uncle and his lord was skinny and yellow, and lying on
a pile of hay and on a bullock cart. It was a pity to hear the
the screams that the two good ladies raised, the slaps that gave each other, the
curses that again were thrown at the damned chivalric books; everything
which was renewed when they saw Don Quixote enter through its doors.
At the news of Don Quixote's coming, Sancho Panza's wife came,
that he had already known that he had gone with him as a squire, and, thus
As he saw Sancho, the first thing he asked him was if the
donkey. Sancho replied that he was better than his master.
"Thanks be to God," she replied, "who has done me so much good; but
Tell me now, friend: what good have you got from your teams?
What Savoyard do you bring to me? What shoes do you bring to your children?
"I do not bring anything deso," said Sancho, "my wife, although I do bring other things from
more moment and consideration.
"I do not receive much pleasure," replied the woman; show me those things of
more consideration and more time, my friend, I want to see you, so that
I rejoice in this heart, how sad and discontented it has been in all
centuries of your absence.
`` I'll show you at home, woman, '' said Panza, `` and for now be happy,
that, being God served that again we go on a trip to find
adventures, you will soon see me count or governor of an island, and not of
the ones out there, but the best that can be found.
-Have heaven for it, my husband; how well we need it. More,
Tell me: what is that about islands, I don't understand?
"It is not honey for the donkey's mouth," answered Sancho; in due time
You will see, woman, and you will still be amazed to hear yourself call your Lordship of all your
vassals.
-What do you say, Sancho, of lordships, islands and vassals? -answered
Juana Panza, who was the name of Sancho's wife, although they were not
relatives, but because it is used in La Mancha to take the surname of
their husbands.
-Don't worry, Juana, for knowing all this in such a hurry; enough I tell you
true, and sew the mouth. I will only know how to tell you, by the way, that there is nothing
more pleasant in the world than to be an honest man squire of a knight
errant adventure seeker. It is true that the most that are not
they come out as comfortable as the man would like, because of the hundred that
They find, the ninety-nine tend to come out wicked and crooked. I know of
expirience, because some I have left blanched, and others ground; but,
With all that, it is a nice thing to wait for events crossing mountains,
scrutinizing jungles, stepping on rocks, visiting castles, lodging in sales
at any discretion, without paying, offered to the devil, the maravedí.
All these talks happened between Sancho Panza and Juana Panza, his wife, in
so much so that Don Quixote's mistress and niece received him, and undressed him, and
they laid him on his old bed. He looked at them with pierced eyes, and
he had just understood where he was. The priest commissioned the niece
had a great account to give to his uncle, and that they were alert that
again do not escape them, telling what had been necessary to
bring her home. Here the two of them raised their cries to heaven again; there
the curses of the chivalric books were renewed, there they asked the
heaven that confused in the center of the abyss the authors of so many
lies and nonsense. Finally, they were confused and fearful of
that they were to see each other without their master and uncle at the same point that they had any
improvement; and it was as they imagined it.
But the author of this story, since with curiosity and diligence he has
searched for the facts that Don Quixote did on his third outing, he has not been able to
find news of them, at least through authentic writings; just fame
has saved, in the memoirs of La Mancha, that Don Quixote, the third time
who left his house, went to Zaragoza, where he found himself in some famous jousts
that they did in that city, and things worth their worth happened to him there
and good understanding. Neither of its end and completion could achieve anything,
he would not reach her or know if good luck did not bring him an ancient
doctor who had in his possession a lead box, which, he said, was
had found in the demolished foundations of an old hermitage that was
renewed; in which box had been found some scrolls written with
Gothic letters, but in Castilian verses, which contained many of his
exploits and gave news of the beauty of Dulcinea del Toboso, of the
figure of Rocinante, the fidelity of Sancho Panza and the burial of the
Don Quixote himself, with different epitaphs and eulogies of his life and
customs.
And those that could be read and taken clean were the ones that here put the
trustworthy author of this new and never seen history. Which author does not ask
those who read it, as a reward for the immense work that it cost him to inquire and
look for all the archives of La Mancha, to bring it to light, but instead give it the
the same credit that discreet people usually give to chivalric books, which
they are so valid in the world; that with this it will be considered well paid and
satisfied, and will be encouraged to take out and look for others, if not so true, as
less of so much invention and hobby.
The first words that were written on the parchment found in
the lead box were these:
THE ACADEMICS OF LA ARGAMASILLA,
PLACE OF LA MANCHA,
IN THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE VALUABLE
DON QUIJOTE OF LA MANCHA,
HOC SCRIPSERUNT:
EL MONICONGO, ACADEMIC FROM LA ARGAMASILLA,
TO THE GRAVE OF DON QUIXOTE
Epitaph
The calvathorn that adorned La Mancha
of more spoil than Jason decrees;
the judgment that the weather vane had
sharp where it was best wide,
the arm that its strength so widens,
that came from Cathay to Gaeta,
the most horrendous and most discreet muse
who recorded verses on the brass plate,
the one who left the Amadises in line,
and in a very little Galaores had,
based on his love and bizarreness,
the one who silenced the Belianises,
the one who wandered in Rocinante,
lies beneath this cold slab.
DEL PANIAGUADO, ACADEMIC OF LA ARGAMASILLA,
In laudem Dulcineae del Toboso
Sonnet
This one that you see with a dull face,
high breasts and spirited gesture,
is Dulcinea, queen of Toboso,
of whom was the great amateur Quixote.
He stepped on the one and the other side
of the great Sierra Negra, and the famous
Montïel field, up to the grassy
plain of Aranjüez, on foot and tired.
Rocinante's fault, oh hard star!
That this lady from La Mancha, and this one I invite
errant knight, in tender years,
she ceased, dying, to be beautiful;
and he, although it remains in writing,
He could not flee from love, anger and deceit.
DEL CAPRICHOSO, DISCRETIOS ACADEMICO DE LA ARGAMASILLA,
IN LOOR OF ROCINANTE, HORSE OF DON QUIXOTE DE LA MANCHA
Sonnet
On the superb diamond throne
that with bloody plants footprint Mars,
frantic, the Manchego his banner
tremola with pilgrim effort.
Hang guns and fine steel
with which it destroys, destroys, cuts and part:
New feats !, but invent art
a new style to the new paladin.
And if Gaula prides himself on his Amadís,
by whose brave descendants Greece
He triumphed a thousand times and his fame widens,
today Quixote crowns the classroom
do Belona presides, and prides himself on him,
more than Greece or Gaula, the Upper Manche.
His glories never stain oblivion,
Well, even Rocinante, in being gallant,
exceeds Brilladoro and Bayardo.
DEL BURLADOR, ACADEMIC ARGAMASILLESCO,
TO SANCHO PANZA
Sonnet
DEL CACHIDIABLO, ACADEMIC OF LA ARGAMASILLA,
IN THE SEPULTURE OF DON QUIXOTE
Epitaph
Here lies the knight,
well ground and badly walking,
who did Rocinante take
along one path and the other.
Sancho Panza the fool
also lies next to him,
squire the most faithful
who saw the squire deal.
DEL TIQUITOC, ACADEMIC OF LA ARGAMASILLA,
IN THE GRAVE OF DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO
Epitaph
Dulcinea rests here;
and, although of plump meats,
turned it to dust and ash
the horrible and ugly death.
It was of pure breed,
and she had the appearance of a lady;
of the great Quixote was flame,
and it was the glory of his village.
These were the verses that could be read; the others, for being
eaten away at the letter, they were handed over to an academic so that by conjecture
declare them. Have news that he has done it, at the cost of many watches
and a lot of work, and that he intends to bring them to light, with the hope of
Don Quixote's third departure.
Forsi altro canterà with miglior plectio.
Finis
Second part of the ingenious knight Don Quixote de la Mancha
RATE
I, Hernando de Vallejo, clerk of the King's Chamber, our lord, of the
residing in his Council, I attest that, having seen himself by the lords of the
a book that Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra composed, entitled Don Quijote
de la Mancha, Part Two, which was printed with the permission of His Majesty,
they valued at four maravedís each sheet on paper, which has seventy-five
three sheets, which in this respect adds and assembles two hundred and ninety-two
maravedís, and they ordered that this rate be put at the beginning of each volume
of said book, so that it is known and understood what it has to ask for and
carry, without exceeding it in any way, as it appears and seems
by the original order and decree on it given, and which remains in my power,
what do I mean; and of order of the said gentlemen of the Council and of
request of the part of the said Miguel de Cervantes, give this fee in
Madrid, on the twenty-first day of the month of October, one thousand six hundred and
fifteen years.
Hernando de Vallejo.
ERRAT FEE
I saw this book entitled Second part of Don Quixote de la Mancha,
composed by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, and there is nothing in him worthy of
note that it does not correspond to its original. Given in Madrid, to twenty-one of
October, one thousand six hundred and fifteen.
The lawyer Francisco Murcia de la Llana.
APPROVAL
By commission and order of the gentlemen of the Council, I have seen the book
contained in this memorial: it does not contain anything against the faith or good
customs, before it is a book of much legal entertainment, mixed with
a lot of moral philosophy; You can be licensed to print. In Madrid,
November 5, one thousand six hundred and fifteen.
Doctor Gutierre de Cetina.
APPROVAL
By commission and order of the lords of the Council, I have seen the Second
part of Don Quijote de la Mancha, by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra: no
it contains something against our holy catholic faith, nor good customs,
before, many of honest recreation and peaceful amusement, which the
the ancients judged their republics to be convenient, for even in the severe
the Lacedaemonians raised their statues to laughter, and the Thessalians the
dedicated parties, as Pausanias says, referred to by Bosio, Book II De
signis Ecclesiae, ch. 10, encouraging withered spirits and spirits
melancholic, of which Tulio remembered in the first De legibus, and the poet
saying:
Interpose tuis interdum gaudia curis,
which the author does by mixing the truths with the mockery, the sweet with the
profitable and moral to facet, concealing in the bait of grace the
hook of rebuke, and complying with the right matter in which
seeks the expulsion of the chivalric books, because with its good
diligently clenching these kingdoms of their contagious disease,
It is a work very worthy of his great ingenuity, honor and luster of our nation,
admiration and invidia of strangers. This is my opinion, except etc. On
Madrid, March 17, 1615.
The teacher Josef de Valdivielso.
APPROVAL
By commission of Dr. Gutierre de Cetina, vicar general of the
town of Madrid, court of His Majesty, I have seen this book of the Second
part of the ingenious knight Don Quixote de la Mancha, by Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra, and I do not find in him anything unworthy of a Christian zeal, nor
that dispenses with decency due to good example, nor moral virtues;
before, much erudition and use, thus in the continence of their good
continued business to extirpate the vain and lying books of chivalry,
whose contagion had spread more than was fair, as in the smoothness
of the Castilian language, not adulterated with annoying and studied affectation,
Rightly abhorred vice of sane men; and in the correction of vices
which he generally touches, occasioned by his sharp speeches, saves with so much
sanity the laws of Christian reprimand, that he who is touched by
the disease that it tries to cure, in the sweet and tasty of its medicines
he will gladly have drunk, when least imagined, without embarrassment or disgust
some, the profitable of the detestation of his vice, with which he will find,
which is the most difficult to achieve, relished and reprimanded. Has been
many who, because they did not know how to temper or purposely mix the useful with
the sweet thing, they have given with all their annoying work on land, because not being able to
imitate Diogenes in the philosopher and learned, daring, not to say licentious
and bleakly, they pretend to imitate him cynically, surrendering to
cursing, inventing cases that did not pass, to make vice capable
who touch of his harsh rebuke, and by chance discover ways to
follow him, until then ignored, with what they come to be, if not
reprehensors, at least teachers of him. Make yourselves hateful to the good
understood, with the people they lose credit, if they had any, to
admit their writings and the vices that they recklessly and recklessly want
correct in a very worse state than before, that not all posts to the same
time they are willing to admit prescriptions or cautery; before,
some much better receive the soft and gentle medicines, with whose
application, the attack and medical knowledge achieves the purpose of solving them,
term that many times is better than not the one that is reached with the rigor of the
iron. They have felt quite different from the writings of Miguel de
Cervantes, both our nation and strangers, because as a miracle they wish
see the author of books that with general applause, as well for his decorum and
decency as for the softness and softness of his speeches, they have received
Spain, France, Italy, Germany and Flanders. I truly certify that in
February twenty-fifth of this year of six hundred and fifteen, having gone
the most illustrious Don Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas, Cardinal Archbishop
of Toledo, my lord, to pay the visit that His Illustrious
ambassador of France, who came to discuss matters concerning the weddings of
his princes and those of Spain, many French knights, of whom
They came accompanying the ambassador, as courteous as they were knowledgeable and friends of
good letters, they reached me and other chaplains of cardinal my lord,
eager to know which books of wit were more valid; and, touching
Perhaps in this one that I was censoring, they hardly heard the name of Miguel
of Cervantes, when they began to make languages, making the
estimate that, in France as well as in the kingdoms of its borders,
had their works: the Galatea, which some of them have almost by heart the
first part of this, and the Novels. His prices were so many,
that I offered to take them to see the author of them, which they estimated with a thousand
displays of wishful thinking. They asked me very young his age, his
profession, quality and quantity. I found myself compelled to say that I was old,
soldier, nobleman and poor man, to whom one responded these formal words:
`` Well, isn't Spain very rich and supported by the treasury for such a man?
public? '' Another of those gentlemen came with this thought and with
keenly, and said: `` If necessity compels you to write, fold
God who never has abundance, so that with his works, being poor,
make everybody rich. '' Well I think it is, for censorship, a little
long; Some will say that it touches the limits of flattering praise; but the truth
of what I say briefly undoes the critic's suspicion and in me the
watch out; Furthermore, today we do not flatter those who do not have what
to prime the beak of the flatterer, who, though affectionately and falsely says of
teasing, pretending to be paid for real. In Madrid, twenty-seven from
February one thousand six hundred and fifteen.
The lawyer Márquez Torres.
PRIVILEGE
Because on your part, Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, it was a date for us
relation that had been composed by the second part of Don Quixote de la
Mancha, of which he was presenting, and, since it is a history book
nice and honest, and having cost you a lot of work and study, we
You begged us to send you to give a license to be able to print and privilege
for twenty years, or as our mercy was; which seen by those of the
our Council, inasmuch as in the said book the diligence that the
award for us on this date has, it was agreed that we should
order to give this our identity card in the said reason, and we have it for good.
For which we give you license and power so that, for time and space of
ten years, the first following years, that run and be counted from the
day of the date of this our identity card onwards, you, or the person who
for this your power hobiere, and not any other, you can print and sell
the said book that disused mention is made; and we hereby license
and faculty to any printer of our kingdoms that you appoint so that
during the said time I can print the original that in ours
Council was seen, which is signed and signed at the end of Hernando de Vallejo,
our Clerk of the Chamber, and one of those who reside in him, with whom before
and first that it is sold, bring it before them, together with the saying
original, so that it can be seen if the said impression conforms to it, or
bring faith in public how, by corretor for us appointed, it was seen and
corrected the said printing by the original saying, and more to the said printer
that ansí print the said book, do not print the beginning and first sheet
do not give more than a single book with the original to the author and person to
whose cost will print it, or any other, for the effect of happiness
correction and rate, until before and first the said book is corrected and
appraised by those of our Council, and being done, and not otherwise,
can print the said beginning and first sheet, in which immediately
put this our license and the approval, rate and misprints, you can not
sell or sell yourself or any other person, until the said book is
in the aforementioned manner, on pain of falling and incurring the penalties contained
in the bliss and laws of our kingdoms that dispose of it; and
more, that during said time someone without your license will not
can print or sell, under penalty that the one who prints and sells it has
lost and misplaced any books, molds, and rigging he may have, and
more incur a penalty of fifty thousand maravedís for each time
he will do the opposite, of which said penalty is a third part for our
Chamber, and the other third part for the judge who sentenced him, and the other
third part for the one who denounces it; and more to those of our Council,
presidents, hearers of our hearings, mayors, bailiffs of the
our House and Court and Chancelleries, and other any justices of
all the cities, towns and places of our kingdoms and lordships, already
each one in his jurisdiction, so those who now are like those who will be
here forward, that you keep and fulfill this our certificate and mercy, that
so we do, and do not go or pass against her in any way, under penalty
of our mercy and of ten thousand maravedís for our Chamber. Dadaist
in Madrid, thirty days of the month of March, one thousand six hundred and fifteen
years.
I, THE KING.
By order of the King our lord:
Pedro de Contreras.
FOREWORD TO THE READER
Oh my God, and how eagerly must you be waiting now, reader
illustrious, or any commoner, this prologue, believing to find revenge in it,
quarrels and vituperations of the author of the second Don Quixote; I say of the one who
They say that he was engendered in Tordesillas and was born in Tarragona! Well really
that I have not give you this content; that, since grievances arouse the
Anger in the most humble breasts, in mine has to suffer this exception
rule. Would you like me to give it from the ass, from the fool and from the daring,
But it does not occur to me: punish him for his sin, with his bread he will
eat and there it is. What I have not been able to stop feeling is that he noticed me
old and one-armed, as if it had been my hand to have stopped the
time, that it did not pass through me, or if my malady had been born in some
tavern, but on the highest occasion ever seen in past centuries, the
present, nor do they expect to see the future. If my wounds don't glow in
the eyes of the beholder, are estimated, at least, in the estimation of
those who know where they were charged; that the soldier rather seems dead in
the battle that I fought in flight; and this is in me in a way, that if now I
proposed and facilitated an impossible, I would rather have found myself in
that prodigious faction that now healed from my wounds without having
found in it. Those that the soldier shows on his face and breasts,
stars are that guide others to heaven of honor, and to desire the
fair praise; and it should be noted that it is not written with gray hair, but
with understanding, which tends to improve over the years.
I have also felt that he calls me invidious, and that, as ignorant, I
describe what invidia is; that, actually really, of two that
There is, I do not know but the saint, the noble and well-intentioned; and,
This being so, as it is, I have no choice but to persecute any priest, and
more if it has in addition to be a relative of the Holy Office; and if he said so
for whom it seems that he said it, he deceived himself of everything in everything: that of such I adore
ingenuity, I admire the works and the continuous and virtuous occupation. But in
Indeed, I thank this gentleman author for saying that my novels are more
satirical than exemplary, but good; and they could not be if not
they had everything.
It seems to me that you tell me that I am very limited and that I contain myself a lot in
terms of my modesty, knowing that affliction has not been added to the afflicted,
and that the one that this man must have is undoubtedly large, because he does not dare
look like open country and clear sky, covering up his name, pretending
his homeland, as if he had done some treason of lese majesty. Yes, for
good fortune, get to know him, tell him from me that I do not consider myself
aggrieved: how well I know what the devil's temptations are, and that one of the
greater is to put a man in the understanding that he can compose and
print a book, with which it gains as much fame as money, and as much money
how much fame; and, for confirmation of this, I want that in your good grace and
grace you tell him this story:
«There was a madman in Seville who took on the funniest nonsense and feared that
gave crazy in the world. And it was that he made a pointed cane pipe in the
end, and, in catching a dog in the street, or anywhere else,
with one foot he took his, and the other lifted him with his hand, and as
he could best accommodate the pipe in the part that, by blowing on it, put
round like a ball; and, having this luck, gave him two
patted his belly, and let him go, telling those around him that
there were always many: '' Will your mercedes think now that it is little
work to inflate a dog? '' »
Will your grace now think that it is little work to make a book?
And if this story does not suit him, you will tell him, dear reader, this one, that too
It is from madman and from dog:
«There was another madman in Córdoba, who was in the habit of bringing over the
head a piece of marble slab, or a not very light edge, and, in
bumping into some careless dog, he would stand next to him, and lead
on him the weight. The dog became humbled, and, barking and howling,
it stopped in three streets. It happened, then, that, among the dogs that unloaded the
cargo, one was a dog of a bonnet, whom his owner loved very much. Low
the song, hit him on the head, the crushed dog raised the cry, raped and
his master felt it, took hold of a measuring stick, and went out to the madman and did not let him
healthy bone; and every stick he gave it said: '' Thief dog, my hound?
Didn't you see, cruel, that my dog ​​was a hound? '' And, repeating the name of
Podenco many times, sent the madman made a henna. Weighed down the madman and
He retired, and in more than a month he did not go out to the square; after which time,
He returned with his invention and with more load. He arrived where the dog was,
and, looking at him very well from point to point, and without wanting or daring to
unloading the stone, it said: '' This is the hound: save! '' In effect, all
how many dogs he ran into, even if they were Alans, or gozques, he said they were
hounds; and thus, he did not let go of the song any more. "
Perhaps this is how this historian could be: that he does not know
will dare to release more the hold of his wit in books than, in being
bad, they are harder than rocks.
Also tell him about the threat he makes me, that he has to take away my profit
with his book, I do not give a shit, that, accommodating me to the famous hors d'oeuvre
of La Perendenga, I answer that I live on Twenty-four, my lord, and
Christ with everyone. Long live the great Count of Lemos, whose Christianity and
liberality, well known, against all the blows of my short fortune I
has on his feet, and live for me the great charity of the most illustrious of Toledo, Mr.
Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas, and even there are no companies in the world, and
even more books that have lyrics are printed against me in the Verses of
Mingo Revulgo. These two princes, without being prompted by my flattery or
another kind of applause, for their kindness alone, have taken charge of the
do me mercy and favor me; in what I consider myself happier and richer
that if fortune by ordinary way had put me at its peak. The
honor can be had by the poor, but not by the vicious; poverty can cloud
to the nobility, but not completely darken it; but, as the virtue gives some
light of itself, even if it is for the inconveniences and cracks of the narrowness,
comes to be esteemed by the high and noble spirits, and, by the
consequently favored.
And do not tell him more, nor do I want to tell you more, but warn you that
consider that this second part of Don Quixote that I offer you is cut
of the same craftsman and of the same cloth as the first, and that in it I give you
Don Quixote dilated, and, finally, dead and buried, because no one was
dare to raise new testimonies, since the past are enough and enough
also that an honest man has reported these discreet follies,
without wanting to enter them again: that the abundance of things,
even if they are good, they are not estimated, and the famine, even of the
bad, it is estimated at something. Forget me to tell you to wait for the Persiles,
I'm already finishing, and the second part of Galatea.
DEDICATION
TO THE COUNT OF LEMOS
Sending to Your Excellency last days my comedies, previously printed
represented, although I remember, I said that Don Quixote was
spurs shod to go and kiss Your Excellency's hands; and
Now I say that he has put them on and set off, and if he there
arrives, it seems to me that I have done some service to Your Excellency,
because there is a lot of rush that from infinite parts they give me to send you
to remove the hamage and nausea caused by another Don Quixote, who, with
second part name, he has disguised himself and run through the orb; and the one
The greatest emperor of China has shown his desire for him, since in
Chinese language there will be a month that he wrote me a letter with his own,
asking me, or, to put it better, begging me to send him, because he wanted
found a school where the Spanish language was read, and he wanted the
The book that was read was that of the story of Don Quixote. Together with
This told me that I was to be the rector of that college.
I asked the bearer if His Majesty had given me any help from
coast. He replied that not by thought. "Well, brother," I replied
I-, you can go back to your China at ten, or at twenty, or
those who come dispatched, because I am not healthy to put myself in such
long trip; Also, about being sick, I'm very penniless, and
emperor for emperor, and monarch for monarch, in Naples I have the great
Count of Lemos, who, without so many degrees from colleges or rectories,
sustains me, protects me and does more mercy than what I am right to wish for. ''
With this I dismissed him, and with this I say goodbye, offering Your Excellency
the Works of Persiles and Sigismunda, a book to which I will end
four months, Deo volente; which has to be either the baddest or the best than
in our language has been composed, I mean of those of
entertainment; and I say that I regret having said the baddest,
because, according to the opinion of my friends, it has to reach the extreme of goodness
possible.
Come Your Excellency with the health that is desired; that will be
Persiles to kiss his hands, and I his feet, as a servant that I am from
Your Excellency. From Madrid, last October, sixteen hundred and
fifteen.
Servant of Your Excellency,
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.
First chapter. Of what the priest and the barber went through with Don Quixote
close to his illness
Cide Hamete Benengeli tells, in the second part of this story and the third
Don Quixote's departure, that the priest and the barber stayed for almost a month
without seeing him, for not renewing him and bringing to his memory past things; but
not for this they stopped visiting their niece and mistress, ordering them
had to count on giving him gifts, giving him comforting things to eat and
appropriate to the heart and brain, whence it came, according to good
speech, all his bad luck. Which said they did so, and
they would do, with the will and possible care, because they saw that their
Sir, at times he was showing signs of being in his entire judgment; of what
which both received great satisfaction, for it seemed to them that they had hit the mark
to have delightedly brought him in the bullock cart, as was recounted in the
first part of this great and punctual story, in its last
chapter. And so, they decided to visit him and experience his
improvement, although it was almost impossible for him to do so, and they agreed not to
touch him at any point of the errant cavalry, so as not to put himself in danger
of unstitching those of the wound, which were so tender.
They visited him, finally, and found him sitting on the bed, dressed in an
green baize, with a red Toledo bonnet; and it was so dry and
amojamado, who seemed nothing but made of mummy meat. They were very good
received, they asked him about his health, and he gave an account of himself and her with
a lot of judgment and with very elegant words; and in the speech of his talk
They came to deal with what they call reason of state and modes of government,
amending this abuse and condemning it, reforming a custom and
banishing another, each of the three becoming a new legislator, a
Modern Lycurgus or a brand-new Solon; and in such a way they renewed the
republic, which seemed only to have been put in a forge, and
another of which they put; and Don Quixote spoke with such discretion in all
the subjects that were touched, that the two examiners believed
undoubtedly he was all good and in his right mind.
The niece and mistress were present for the talk, and they did not tire of giving
thank God for seeing your master with such good understanding; but the priest,
changing the first purpose, which was not to touch him in a matter of chivalry,
wanted to do everything in every experience if Don Quixote's health was
true or false, and thus, from set to set, he came to tell some new
that they had come from court; and, among others, said that it was believed
that the Turk was coming down with a powerful armada, and that his design was unknown,
nor where was such a great cloud to discharge; and, with this fear, with what
almost every year we have a weapon, all of Christendom was placed on it, and
His Majesty had provided the coasts of Naples and Sicily and the island
from Malta. To this Don Quixote replied:
-His Majesty has done as a most prudent warrior to provide his estates with
time, because the enemy does not find him unnoticed; but if you take my
advice, I advise him to use a prevention, of which His
Majesty, the hour of ago must be very far from thinking about her.
The priest scarcely heard this when he said to himself:
-God have your hand, poor Don Quixote: it seems to me that
Cliff from the high summit of your madness to the deep abyss of your
simplicity!
But the barber, who had already given the same thought as the priest,
he asked Don Quixote what the warning of prevention was that he said
it was well done; Maybe it could be such that it was put on the list of
the many impertinent warnings that are usually given to princes.
"Mine, Mr. Rapador," said Don Quixote, "will not be impertinent, but
belonging.
`` I am not saying it therefore, '' replied the barber, `` but because he has shown the
experience that all or the most discretions given to His Majesty, or are
impossible, or absurd, or in damage to the king or the kingdom.
`` Well, mine, '' answered Don Quixote, `` is neither impossible nor absurd, but
the easiest, the fairest and the tightest and shortest that can fit in
thought of any arbitrator.
"Your grace is taking time to tell him, Senor Don Quixote," said the priest.
`` I wouldn't want, '' said Don Quixote, `` for me to tell you here now, and it dawns
tomorrow in the ears of the gentlemen councilors, and another
thank you and the award of my work.
`` For me, '' said the barber, `` I give the floor, here and in front of
God, not to say what your grace says to the king or to roque, or to
earthly man, oath that I learned from the romance of the priest who in the
preface warned the king of the thief who had stolen the hundred doubles and the
his mule the walker.
`` I don't know stories, '' said Don Quixote, `` but I know that that oath is good, in
fee I know that the barber is a good man.
`` When it wasn't, '' said the priest, `` I'll pay him and leave for him, that in this
In this case, only a mute person will speak, on pain of paying what was judged and sentenced.
-And at your mercy, who trusts him, priest? Don Quixote said.
"My profession," replied the priest, "which is to keep a secret."
-Body of such! Don Quixote said at this time. Is there more but to send His
Majesty by public proclamation that they gather in court for an appointed day
all the knights-errant who roam Spain; that, even if they didn't come
if not half a dozen, such could come among them, that only
destroy all the power of the Turk? Stay with me your graces, and
go with me. Is it a new thing to undo a single gentleman
an army of two hundred thousand men walking, as if all together had
a single throat, or were they made of alphabets? If not, tell me: how many
stories are full of these wonders? There was, at a bad time for me, that
I do not mean for another, to live today the famous Don Belianís, or any of
those of the innumerable lineage of Amadís de Gaula; what if any of these today
He lived and faced the Turk, at a fee that he did not rent the profit to him!
But God will look out for his people, and will provide some who, if not as brave as
the past knights errant, at least it will not be inferior to them in the
cheer up; and God understands me, and I say no more.
-Oh! said the niece at this point; Let them kill me if my lord does not want
to be a knight errant again!
To which Don Quixote said:
-Entering knight I have to die, and the Turk goes down or goes up when he wants and
how powerfully it can; that again I say that God understands me.
At this time the barber said:
-I beg your mercedes to give me a license to tell a story
brief that happened in Seville, that, for coming here like a mold, I feel like
to tell you.
Don Quixote gave the license, and the priest and the others paid attention to him, and
he started this way:
- «In the madhouse of Seville there was a man whose relatives
had been put there for lack of judgment. He was graduated in canons from Osuna,
but, even if it were for Salamanca, according to the opinion of many,
be crazy. This such graduate, after a few years of recollection,
implied that he was sane and in his right mind, and with this
imagination wrote to the archbishop, pleading earnestly and very
agreed reasons ordered him to get out of that misery in which he lived, because
by the mercy of God he had already collected the lost judgment; but what
his relatives, to enjoy the part of his estate, had him there, and,
Despite the truth, they wanted him to be mad to death.
»The archbishop, persuaded of many arranged and discreet tickets, sent
a chaplain of his be informed of the return of the house if it was true what
that graduate wrote to him, and that he also spoke to the madman, and what if
It seemed to him that he had judgment, he would take him out and set him free. Did it like this
the chaplain, and the returnee told him that the man was still going crazy: that,
since he spoke many times as a person of great understanding,
Corporal fired so foolishly that in many and large they equaled
his first discretions, how you could make the experience talking to him.
He wanted to make her the chaplain, and, putting him with the madman, spoke with him for an hour
and more, and in all that time the madman never said twisted reason or
crazy; Earlier, he spoke so attentively that the chaplain was forced to
to believe that the madman was sane; and among other things that the madman told him
was that the returnee had annoyance at him, for not losing the gifts that his
relatives made him because he said he was still crazy, and with lucid
intervals; and that the greatest opposite that in his misfortune he had was his much
property, then, for their enemies to enjoy it, they fraudulently and doubted the
The mercy that Our Lord had done him in turning him from beast to man.
Finally, he spoke in a way that made the returnee suspicious, greedy and
heartless to his relatives, and to him so discreet that the chaplain
determined to take him with him to the archbishop to see him and play with the
hand the truth of that business.
With this good fee, the good chaplain asked the returnee to send the
dresses with which the lawyer had entered; the returner said again
look at what he was doing, because, without a doubt, the graduate still
he was mad. The preventions and
warnings from the returner to stop taking him; obeyed the retur,
seeing to be order of the archbishop; they put on the lawyer their dresses, which
They were new and decent, and as he saw himself dressed sane and naked in
crazy, he begged the chaplain to give him a license to go to
say goodbye to your fellow madmen. The chaplain said he loved him
accompany and see the crazy people in the house. They went up, in effect, and with
they some who were present; and, when the graduate arrived at a
cage where an angry madman was, although then calm and still, he
He said: '' My brother, see if you send me something, I'm going home; that already
God has been served, by his infinite goodness and mercy, without me
to deserve it, to become my judgment: I am already sane and sane; what about the
power of God nothing is impossible. Have great hope and confidence
in Him, who, since he has returned to my first state, will also return
Him if you trust Him. I will be careful to send you some gifts that
eat, and eat them in any case, I let you know what I imagine, as who has
been through it, that all our follies come from having stomachs
empty and the brains full of air. Strive, strive, that the
Failure in misfortune reduces health and brings death. ''
»All these reasons the lawyer heard another madman who was in another
cage, front of that of the furious, and, rising from an old mat
where he was lying naked naked, he asked loudly who he was
the one who left healthy and sane. The lawyer replied: '' I am, brother, the
that I'm leaving; that I no longer need to be here, for what I give
infinite thanks to the heavens, what a great favor you have done me. ''
"Look what you say, graduate, don't be fooled by the devil," replied the madman;
Calm your foot, and stay in your house, and you will save your return. ''
"I know I'm good," replied the lawyer, "and there will be no reason to return
to walk stations ''. '' Are you good? -said the madman-: now well, that will say;
walk with God, but I vote you Jupiter, whose majesty I represent in
the earth, that for only this sin that Seville commits today, in taking you out
this house and having you as sane, I have to do such a punishment in it,
Let there be a memory of him for all the centuries of the centuries, amen. You do not know
you, diminished bachelor, I can do it, well, as I say, I am
Thunderous Jupiter, I have in my hands the scorching rays with which I can
and do I threaten and destroy the world? But with only one thing I want
punish this ignorant people, and it is by not raining on him or on all his
district and contour for three whole years, to be counted from the
day and point in which this threat has been made onwards. You free, you
healthy, you sane, and I crazy, and I sick, and I tied ...? So I think it will rain
like thinking about hanging myself. ''
The people around him were attentive to the voices and reasons of the madman,
but our licentiate, turning to our chaplain and seizing him by the
hands, he said: `` Do not be sorry, my lord, do not pay attention to
what this madman has said, that if he is Jupiter and he does not want to rain, I,
that I am Neptune, the father and the god of the waters, I will rain every time
that I want and need. '' To which the chaplain replied:
With all that, Mr. Neptune, it will not be good to anger Mr. Jupiter:
your grace stay at home, that another day, when there is more comfort
and more space, we will return at your mercy. '' Laughed the return and the
present, for whose laughter the chaplain half ran; they undressed the
graduate, he stayed home and the story was over. "
"Well, is this the story, Mr. Barber," said Don Quixote, "that, to come
here like a mold, I couldn't stop telling you? Ah, sir rapista, sir
rapist, and how blind is he who does not see through sieve cloth! And is it possible
that your grace does not know that the comparisons made from wit to
wit, from valor to valor, from loveliness to loveliness and from lineage to lineage
are they always hateful and unwelcome? I, Mr. Barber, am not Neptune, the
God of the waters, nor do I try that nobody considers me to be discreet, not being so;
I only tire myself to make the world understand in the error that it is in no
renew in oneself the most happy time where the order of the errant was
chivalry. But our depraved age of enjoying so much is not worthy
as well as the one enjoyed by the ages where the errant knights took
their charge and threw on their backs the defense of the kingdoms, the protection
the maidens, the relief of the orphans and wards, the punishment of the
proud and the prize of the humble. The most of the gentlemen that agora
used, before the damasks, brocades and other rich fabrics of
that they dress, that the mesh with which they are armed; there is no longer a gentleman
sleep in the fields, subject to the rigor of heaven, armed with all weapons
from head to toe; and there is no one who, without removing the feet from the
stirrups, leaning on his spear, just try to head off, as they say, the
dream, as did knights errant. There are no longer any who,
leaving this forest, I entered that mountain, and from there I stepped on a barren
and deserted beach of the sea, most times stormy and disturbed, and, finding
in it and on its shore a small boat without oars, sail, mast or rigging
some, with intrepid heart threw herself into him, surrendering to the
relentless waves of the deep sea, which are already rising to the sky and are already descending
to the abyss; and he, putting his chest to the incontestable squall, at least
It is tasted, it is three thousand and more leagues distant from the place where it is
embarked, and, jumping into remote and unknown land, things happen to him
worthy of being written, not on parchment, but in bronze. More agora, now
the laziness of diligence, the idleness of work, the vice of
virtue, the arrogance of bravery and the theory of the practice of
weapons, which only lived and shone in the golden ages and in the
errant knights. If not, tell me: who is more honest and braver than
the famous Amadís de Gaula ?; Who could be more discreet than Palmerín de
England?; Who is more comfortable and manual than Tirante el Blanco ?; who
more gallant than Lisuarte from Greece ?; Who else stabbed or stabbed
what don Belianís ?; Who is more intrepid than Perión de Gaula, or who else
threatening danger than Felixmarte of Hircania, or who more sincere than
Esplandián ?; Who is more daring than Don Cirongilio of Thrace ?; who else
Bravo that Rodamonte ?; Who is more prudent than King Nephew ?; who else
daring that Reinaldos ?; Who more invincible than Roldán ?; and who else
gallant and more courteous than Rugero, from whom the dukes of
Ferrara, according to Turpín in his Cosmography? All these gentlemen, and others
many that I could say, priest, were knights errant, light and
glory of chivalry. These, or such as these, I wish they were
those of my will, that, if so, His Majesty would be well served and
save a lot of expense, and the Turk will remain peeling his beards, and with
This, I do not want to stay at my house, because the chaplain does not remove me from it; what if
your Jupiter, as the barber has said, let it not rain, here I am, who
I will rain when I feel like it. I say this because Mr. Bacía knows that
I get it.
`` In truth, Senor Don Quixote, '' said the barber, `` I did not say so, therefore,
and so help me God as my intention was good, and that it should not be yours
Thank you to feel.
"Whether I can feel it or not," answered Don Quixote, "I know it."
To this the priest said:
-Although I have hardly spoken a word until now, and I would not
be left with a scruple that gnaws at my conscience, born of what
that here Mr. Don Quixote has said.
"For other things," answered Don Quixote, "the priest has a license;
And so, you can say your scruple, because it is not a pleasure to walk with the
scrupulous conscience.
"Well, with that approval," replied the priest, "I say that my scruple is that
I cannot in any way persuade myself that the whole bunch of gentlemen
errant that your grace, Mr. Don Quixote, has referred, have been
really and truly people of flesh and blood in the world; before I imagine
that everything is fiction, fable and lie, and dreams told by men
awake, or, better to say, half asleep.
`` That is another error, '' answered Don Quixote, `` in which many have fallen, that
they believe that there have been such gentlemen in the world; and I many times,
with various people and occasions, I have endeavored to expose the truth
this almost common deception; But sometimes I have not come out with my intention, and
others yes, supporting it on the shoulders of truth; which is true
so true, that I am about to say that with my own eyes I saw Amadís from
Gaula, who was a tall man in body, white in face, well placed
beard, though black, with a soft to rigorous view, short of reason,
I am slow to get angry and quick to put down my anger; and in the way that I have outlined
Amadís could, in my opinion, paint and discover all the knights
errant walk in the stories in the world, that, by the apprehension that
I have that they were how their stories tell, and for the feats that
did and conditions that they had, can be obtained by good philosophy
their features, their colors and heights.
-How great does it seem to your grace, my lord Don Quixote?
the barber - must it be the giant Morgante?
`` In this matter of giants, '' answered Don Quixote, `` there are different opinions, if
there have been or not in the world; but the Holy Scripture, which cannot
missing an atom in the truth, shows us that there were, telling us the
history of that Philistine Goliath, who was seven and a half cubits
height, which is an inordinate grandeur. Also on the island of Sicily
have found taps and backs so great, that their greatness shows that
its owners were giants, and as big as great towers; that
Geometry takes this truth out of doubt. But, with all this, I will not be able to say with
certain how big Morgante was, although I imagine it must not have been
very high; and move me to be from this seem to find in history where it is done
particular mention of his exploits that he often slept underneath
roofing; and, since he found a house where he fit, of course it was not
inordinate his greatness.
"That's right," said the priest.
Who, liking to hear him say such great nonsense, asked him what
what he felt about the faces of Reinaldos de Montalbán and Don Roldán,
and of the other Twelve Peers of France, since they had all been knights
walking.
`` Of Reinaldos, '' answered Don Quixote, `` I dare say that it was wide
face, red in color, the eyes dancing and somewhat jumped, dotted and
too angry, friend of thieves and lost people. From Roldán, or
Rotolando, or Orlando, that with all these names the stories name,
I am of opinion and I affirm that he was of medium height, broad shoulders,
somewhat stooped, brown in the face and hairy beard, hairy on the body and
threatening sight; short of reason, but very restrained and well bred.
"If Roldán was not a gentler man than your grace has said," replied the
cure-, it was no wonder that Mrs. Angelica la Bella disdained him and
leave for the gala, verve and grace that the andirloom must have
barbiponiente to whom she gave herself; and she was discreet from adamar before the
Medoro's softness than Roldan's roughness.
`` That Angelica, '' answered Don Quixote, `` senor cura, was a maiden
distracted, wandering and somewhat capricious, and so full left the world of her
impertinences as of the fame of his beauty: he despised a thousand lords, a thousand
brave and a thousand discreet, and was content with a little bearded page, without
another hacienda or name than the one who could give him thanked the friendship that
kept his friend. The great singer of her beauty, the famous Ariosto, by no means
dare, or for not wanting to sing what happened to this lady after
of his vile surrender, which should not have been too honest things, the
left where he said:
And as from Cathay he received the scepter,
maybe someone else will sing with a better plectrum.
And, without a doubt, that this was like prophecy; that poets are also called
vates, which means fortune tellers. See this clear truth, because, after
Here, a famous Andalusian poet cried and sang his tears, and another famous and
the only Castilian poet sang her beauty.
`` Tell me, Señor Don Quixote, '' said the barber at this time, `` has there not been
some poet who has done some satire on that lady Angelica, among
how many have praised it?
`` I think well, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that if Sacripante or Roldán were
poets, who had already soaped the maiden; because it's own and
natural of the despised and unaccepted poets of their feigned ladies -or
feigned, in effect, of those whom they chose to be the ladies of their
thoughts-, take revenge with satires and libels (revenge, by the way,
unworthy of generous breasts), but until now it has not reached my news
no infamous verse against Senora Angelica, who brought the
world.
-Miracle! -said the priest.
And, in this, they heard that the mistress and the niece, who had already left the
conversation, they shouted loudly in the courtyard, and they all came to the noise.
Chapter II. Which deals with the notable quarrel that Sancho Panza had with the
niece and mistress of Don Quixote, with other funny subjects
The story goes that the voices heard by Don Quixote, the priest and the
barber belonged to the niece and mistress, who gave them saying to Sancho Panza,
who was struggling to get in to see Don Quixote, and they defended the door for him:
-What does this show want in this house? Gone to yours, brother, what
you are, and no other, the one who unleashes and elicits my lord, and takes him by
those andurriales.
To which Sancho replied:
-Mistress of Satan, the deluded, and the deluded, and the carried by those
Andurriales is me, not your master; he took me through those worlds, and you
you are deceiving yourselves in half the fair price: he took me out of my house with
deceive, promising me an island, that until now I wait for it.
"Bad islands drown you," replied the niece, "cursed Sancho." And that
are they insulas? Is it something to eat, sweet tooth, glutton, that you are?
`` It is not about eating, '' replied Sancho, `` but about ruling and ruling better than four
cities and that four court mayors.
`` With all that, '' said the mistress, `` you will not enter here, sack of wickedness and sack of
malice. Go govern your house and work your fish, and
stop pretending islands or islands.
The priest and the barber were very pleased to hear the conversation of the three;
but Don Quixote, fearful that Sancho would unravel and unravel some
heap of malicious nonsense, and played at points that would not suit him
to his credit, he called him, and made the two of them shut up and let him in.
Sancho entered, and the priest and the barber said goodbye to Don Quixote, whose
health despaired, seeing how placed he was in his ravings
thoughts, and how embedded in the simplicity of his malandantes
knights; And so the priest said to the barber:
-You will see, compadre, how, when we least think about it, our hidalgo comes out
again to blow up the shore.
I do not doubt that, 'replied the barber,' but I am not so amazed
the madness of the knight and the simplicity of the squire, who so
believed he has that of the island, which I think they will not take it out of the helmet
how many disappointments can you imagine.
`` God will remedy them, '' said the priest, `` and let us watch: we will see what
for this machine of nonsense of such a gentleman and such a squire, who
It seems that they forged them both in a same turquoise, and that the madness
of the lord, without the foolishness of the servant, they were not worth a shit.
`` Yes, '' said the barber, `` and I will be very glad to know what the
two.
`` I'm sure, '' replied the priest, `` that the niece or the mistress tells us about it.
later, that they are not of condition that they will stop listening to it.
Meanwhile, Don Quixote shut himself up with Sancho in his room; and, being
alone, he said:
-It weighs a lot, Sancho, that you said and say that I was the one who took you out
of your boxes, knowing that I did not stay in my houses: together we went out,
together we went and together we made a pilgrimage; the same fortune and the same luck
It has run for both of them: if they supported you once, they have ground me
cent, and this is what I have of advantage to you.
"That was right," answered Sancho, "because, according to your
Grace says, more attached are misfortunes to knights errant than to
his squires.
"You were fooled, Sancho," said Don Quixote; according to that, when caput
dolet ..., and so on.
"I don't understand any other language than my own," answered Sancho.
`` I mean, '' said Don Quixote, `` that when the head hurts, all
limbs hurt; and so, being I your master and lord, I am your head, and you my
part, for you are my servant; and, for this reason, the evil that touches me, or
I will touch, it will hurt you, and yours will hurt me.
That was how it had to be, said Sancho, but when they kept me
limb, my head was behind the fences, watching me fly through the
airs, without feeling any pain; and, since members are obliged to
to ache from the evil of the head, she had to be obliged to ache
of them.
`` Do you mean to say now, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that it didn't hurt
when they kept you? And if you say it, don't say it, don't even think it;
Well then, I felt more pain in my spirit than you did in your body. But
let's leave this aside for now, what time will there be where we will ponder it and
Let's get it right, and tell me, Sancho, my friend: what do they say about me for
that place? In what opinion do the common people have me, in what hidalgos and in what
The Knights? What do they say about my bravery, what about my exploits and what about me
courtesy? What is said about the assumption that I have taken to resuscitate and return
to the world the already forgotten chivalric order? Finally, I want, Sancho, me
say what about this has reached your ears; and this you have to tell me
without adding to the good or subtracting from the bad anything, that of the loyal vassals
that is to say the truth to their masters in their being and proper figure, without
flattery increases it or another vain respect diminishes it; And I want to
know, Sancho, that if the truth reached the ears of the princes
naked, without the dresses of flattery, other centuries would run, other
ages would be considered more iron than ours, which I understand that,
Of those that are used now, it is the golden one. Please serve yourself this warning, Sancho,
so that you discreetly and well-intentionedly put the truth of
the things you know about what I've asked you.
`` I will do that very willingly, my lord, '' replied Sancho, `` on condition
that your grace should not be angry at what I say, because it wants me to
say in leathers, without dressing him in other clothes of those with which they came to
my news.
"In no way will I be angry," replied Don Quixote. Well you can, Sancho,
speak freely and bluntly.
`` Well, the first thing I say, '' he said, `` is that the common people have at your mercy
for great madman, and to me for no less foolish. The nobles say that,
not containing your grace within the limits of nobility, it has been
Don put on and the knight has been attacked with four strains and two
earth and with a cloth behind and another in front. The gentlemen say no
would like the noblemen to oppose them, especially those
squire noblemen who smoke their shoes and take points from the
black stockings with green silk.
`` That, '' said Don Quixote, `` has nothing to do with me, because I always walk well.
dressed, and never mended; broken, it might as well be; and the broken one, more than the
weapons than time.
`` As for bravery, courtesy, feats and
Asumpto of your mercy, there are different opinions; some say: "crazy,
but funny "; others," brave, but unhappy "; others," courteous, but
impertinent "; and around here they go on about so many things, that not even
neither your mercy nor me leave us healthy bones.
`` Look, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` wherever virtue is in
eminent degree, is persecuted. Few or none of the famous males who
They passed away from being slandered of malice. Julius Caesar, most courageous,
very prudent and courageous captain, he was noted as ambitious and somewhat
not clean, neither in their clothes nor in their customs. Alejandro, whom his
feats earned him the renown of Magno, they say of him who had his certain
drunk points. Of Hercules, of the many labors, it is said that
It was lewd and spring. Of Don Galaor, brother of Amadís de Gaula, it is whispered
that it was more than too fancy; and of his brother, who was a crybaby. A) Yes
that, oh Sancho !, among the many slanders of good, may well pass
mine, as they are not more than you have said.
-There's the touch, my father's body! Sancho replied.
-Well, is there more? asked Don Quixote.
"The tail has yet to be flayed," said Sancho. Up to here are cakes
and painted bread; but if your grace wants to know everything there is about
the caloñas that they put on it, I'll bring you here later at the moment who will
say all, without missing a word; that last night the son of
Bartolomé Carrasco, who comes from studying from Salamanca, graduated from high school, and,
when I went to welcome him, he told me that history was already in books
of your mercy, with the name of the Ingenious Hidalgo Don Quixote de la
Stain; and says that they lie to me in it with my very name of Sancho
Panza, and Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, with other things that we went through
us alone, that I made crosses of scared how could he know
historian who wrote them.
"I assure you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that it must be some wise man
charming the author of our story; that such is not concealed
nothing they want to write.
`` And how, '' said Sancho, `` if he was wise and charming, then (according to the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco, that's the name of the one I have said) that the
The author of the story is called Cide Hamete Aubergine!
"That name is Moorish," answered Don Quixote.
`` It will be so, '' answered Sancho, `` because for the most part I have heard that
the Moors are friends of aubergines.
"You must, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "err in the nickname of that
Cide, which in Arabic means sir.
`` It might well be, '' replied Sancho, `` but if your grace likes me to
have him come here, I'll go for him in the air.
`` You will give me great pleasure, friend, '' said Don Quixote, `` that you have me suspense.
What have you told me, and I will not eat a bite that I know well until I am informed
of everything.
"Well, I'm going for him," answered Sancho.
And, leaving his master, he went to look for the bachelor, with whom he returned from
There a little space, and between the three they had a hilarious discussion.
Chapter III. Of the ridiculous reasoning that passed between Don Quixote, Sancho
Panza and the bachelor Sansón Carrasco
Don Quixote was also thoughtful, waiting for Bachelor Carrasco,
who expected to hear the news of himself put in the book, as he had
said Sancho; and it could not be persuaded that such a story existed, for even
was not lean on the blade of his sword the blood of the enemies that
he had died, and they already wanted his high knights to walk in stamp.
With all that, he imagined that some wise man, or already friend or foe, by art of
enchantment will have given them to the stamp: yes friend, to magnify them and
to raise them on the most marked of knight errant; yes enemy, stop
annihilate them and put them under the most vile than some vile squire
they would have written, since - he said to each other - that never feats of squires
they were written; and when it was true that such a story had, being
of a knight-errant, by force he had to be grand, tall, distinguished,
magnificent and true.
With this he consoled himself somewhat, but it saddened him to think that its author was
Moor, according to that name of Cide; and from the Moors you couldn't wait for the truth
some, because they are all tricksters, forgers, and chimerists. Feared no
would have treated their loves with some indecency, which would result in
impairment and damage to the honesty of his wife Dulcinea del Toboso;
she wished he had declared his fidelity and the decorum that had always
kept, belittling queens, empresses and maidens of all
qualities, keeping the impetus of natural movements at bay; and so,
wrapped and stirred in these and many other imaginations, they found him
Sancho y Carrasco, whom Don Quixote received with great courtesy.
It was the bachelor, although his name was Samson, not very big in body, although
very great sly, haggard in color, but with a very good understanding;
He would be up to twenty-four years old, round-faced, flat-nosed, and
big mouth, all signs of being malicious and friend of
derision and mockery, as he showed in seeing Don Quixote, putting
in front of him on his knees, saying:
"Give me your greatness your hands, Mr. Don Quixote de la Mancha;" that, by
the habit of San Pedro that I wear, although I have no other orders than
first four, that is your mercy one of the most famous gentlemen
Wanderers that there have been, and will not even be, in all the roundness of the earth.
Well there is Cide Hamete Benengeli, that the story of your greatness left
written, and there is also the curious one who took care to make them translate from
Arabic in our vulgar Spanish, for universal entertainment of the
people.
He made him get up Don Quixote, and said:
-That way, is it true that there is a story of mine, and that he was Moorish and wise?
who composed it?
`` It is so true, sir, '' said Samson, `` that I have for myself that today
more than twelve thousand books of such history are printed; if not, say so
Portugal, Barcelona and Valencia, where they have been printed; and there is still fame that I know
is printing in Antwerp, and it seems to me that there should be no
nation or language where it is not translated.
`` One of the things, '' said Don Quixote, `` that must give the most
content to a virtuous and eminent man is to see himself, live, walk with good
name by the languages ​​of the peoples, printed and on stamp. I said with good
name because, being the opposite, no death will be equal to it.
-If for good reputation and if for good name it goes -said the bachelor-, only
your grace takes the palm to all the knights errant; because the
The Moorish in their language and the Christian in his were careful to paint us
very much alive the gallantry of your grace, the great spirit in undertaking the
dangers, patience in adversity and suffering, as well as in
misfortunes as in injuries, honesty and continence in love
so platonic of your grace and of my lady doña Dulcinea del Toboso.
`` Never, '' Sancho Panza said at this point, `` have I heard my lady call with a gift.
Dulcinea, but only Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, and she's already doing this
wrong history.
"That is not a major objection," replied Carrasco.
"No, by the way," answered Don Quixote; but tell me your grace, sir
bachelor: what feats of mine are the most weighted in that story?
-In that -answered the bachelor-, there are different opinions, as there are
different tastes: some stick to the adventure of the windmills,
that to your mercy they seemed Briareos and giants; others, to that of
fullers; this one, to the description of the two armies, which later
they appeared to be two herds of rams; that one makes the dead one more expensive
they took Segovia to be buried; one says that the one of the
freedom of the galley slaves; another, that neither equals that of the two giants
benitos, with the quarrel of the brave Biscayan.
`` Tell me, Mr. Bachelor, '' Sancho said at this time, `` does adventure come in there?
of the yangüeses, when our good Rocinante wanted to ask
popcorn in the gulf?
`` Nothing was left, '' replied Samson, `` to the wise man in the inkwell: everything
he says and points it out, even about the prancing that good Sancho did in
the blanket.
"On the blanket I did not prance," answered Sancho; in the air yes, and even
more than I would like.
`` As I imagine, '' said Don Quixote, `` there is no human history in the world.
that does not have its ups and downs, especially those that deal with chivalry,
which can never be filled with successful events.
`` With all that, '' replied the bachelor, `` say some who have read the
history to be lazy the authors of the
some of the infinite sticks that in different encounters they gave to the Lord
Don Quixote.
"That's where the truth of the story comes in," said Sancho.
`` They could also shut them up out of fairness, '' said Don Quixote, `` since the
actions that neither change nor alter the truth of history there is no reason
write them, if they are to redound in contempt of the lord of history. TO
fee that Aeneas was not as pious as Virgil paints him, nor as prudent
Ulysses as described by Homer.
`` Yes, '' replied Samson, `` but one is to write like a poet and the other like
historian: the poet can tell, or sing things, not as they were,
but how they should be; and the historian has to write them, not as they should
to be, but as they were, without adding or subtracting anything from the truth.
`` Well, if that Moorish gentleman is going to tell the truth, '' said Sancho,
I'm sure that mine will be found among my lord's clubs; because
never at their mercy they took the measurement of the backs that they did not take it
to me of the whole body; but there is no wonder, because, as the
My lord himself, the members have to participate in the pain in the head.
"You are socarrón, Sancho," replied Don Quixote. A fee that you do not lack
memory when you want to have it.
"When I wanted to forget about the blows they gave me," he said.
Sancho-, the cardinals will not allow it, who are still fresh in the
ribs.
`` Be quiet, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` and do not interrupt Mr. Bachelor,
Who I beg, come forward to tell me what is said about me in the aforementioned
history.
"And me," said Sancho, "who also say that I am one of the main
presonajes della.
"Characters that you don't pretend, Sancho friend," said Samson.
-Do we have another voquibles reproacher? Sancho said. Well go to that,
and we will not end in a lifetime.
-God give it to me, Sancho -answered the bachelor-, if you are not the
second person in the story; and that there is such, that it is more precious to hear you speak
to you than to the most painted of all of it, since there are also those who say
that you were too gullible in believing that the
government of that island, offered by Don Quixote, who is
Present.
`` There is still sun on the fences, '' said Don Quixote, `` and the more it is
As Sancho comes of age, with the experience that the years give, he will be more
suitable and more skilled to be a governor who is not there now.
"By God, sir," said Sancho, "the island that I did not rule over the years
that I have, I will not rule it with the years of Methuselah. The damage is that
said island is entertained, I do not know where, and not in missing me the
Calm to rule it.
`` Entrust it to God, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` that everything will be done well, and
maybe better than you think; that the leaf does not move on the tree without
God's will.
"That is true," said Samson, "that God willing, Sancho will not be lacking.
a thousand islands to rule, the more one.
`` Governor, I have seen around there, '' said Sancho, `` that, in my opinion, they do not
the sole of my shoe, and, with all that, they call them lordship, and they are served with
silver.
"These are not rulers of islands," replied Samson, "but of other
more manual governments; that those who rule islands should at least
know grammar.
`` With the grass I would get along, '' said Sancho, `` but with the tica, I don't even
I do not shoot or pay, because I do not understand it. But, leaving this from the government in
God's hands, may he throw me to the parts where more of me is served, I say,
Mr. Bachelor Samson Carrasco, who has infinitely pleased me that the
author of the story has talked about me in a way that does not upset things
that are told about me; that by faith of a good squire that if he had said about me
things that were not very old Christian, as I am, that they had to hear us
the deaf.
"That would be working miracles," Samson replied.
`` Miracles or no miracles, '' said Sancho, `` each one looks at how he talks or how
write about the people, and do not put the first thing that comes to you
to the magín.
-One of the marks that put such a story -said the bachelor- is that
its author put in it a novel entitled The impertinent curious man; not for
bad or for bad reasoning, but for not being from that place, nor does it have anything to do with
with the history of his mercy of Mr. Don Quixote.
`` I'll bet, '' Sancho replied, `` that you have mixed the cabbage hidedog with
baskets.
Now I say, said Don Quixote, that the author of my
history, but some ignorant talkative, who, blindly and without any
speech, he began to write it, whatever comes out, as Orbaneja did,
the painter from Úbeda, who, when asked what he painted, replied: '' What
come out. '' Perhaps he painted a rooster, of such luck and so bad looking, that
It was necessary for him to write with him in gothic letters: "This is a rooster."
And so it must be for my story, which will need a comment to
understand it.
`` Not that, '' replied Samson, `` because it is so clear that there is nothing to
make it difficult: children fondle it, waiters read it, men
they understand it and the old celebrate it; And finally it's so hackneyed and so
read and so known to all kinds of people, that they have hardly seen any
skinny nag, when they say: "Rocinante goes there." And those who have given the most to
their letura are the pages: there is no antechamber of the lord where there is not a
Don Quixote: some take him if others leave him; these attack him and those
they ask him. Finally, such a story is the most enjoyable and least
harmful entertainment that until now has been seen, because in all
she is not discovered, not even by similarities, a dishonest word or a
less than catholic thinking.
`` To write differently, '' said Don Quixote, `` it was not to write truths,
but lies; and the historians who use lies had to be
burned, like those who make counterfeit money; and I don't know what moved the author
to make use of other people's novels and stories, having so much to write in the
mine: without a doubt he must have followed the saying: "Of straw and hay ...",
and so on. Well, in truth, just by expressing my thoughts, my
sighs, my tears, my good wishes and my rushes could
make a volume greater, or as large as all the
Toasting works. In effect, what I achieve, Mr. Bachelor, is that
To compose stories and books, of whatever kind, it is necessary
great judgment and mature understanding. Say thank you and write gifts
is of great ingenuity: the most discreet figure in comedy is that of the
silly, because the one who wants to imply that it is simple should not be so. The
history is like a sacred thing; because it must be true, and where is the
truth is God, as for truth; but notwithstanding this, there are some
That is how they compose and throw books of themselves as if they were donuts.
"There is no book so bad," said the bachelor, "that it doesn't have something good in it."
"There is no doubt about that," replied Don Quixote; but many times it happens that
those who had merit gained and achieved great fame for their
written, in giving them to the stamp, they lost it altogether, or the
they undermined something.
The cause is, Samson said, that as printed works look
slowly, their faults are easily seen, and the more they are scrutinized as
the fame of the one who composed them is greater. Men famous for their wits,
the great poets, the illustrious historians, always, or most of the time,
They are envied by those who have for pleasure and for particular
entertainment judging the writings of others, without having given some of their own
in the light of the world.
`` That is not surprising, '' said Don Quixote, `` because many theologians have to
they are not good for the pulpit, and they are very nice to know the faults or
leftovers from those who preach.
`` This is all like that, Señor Don Quixote, '' said Carrasco, `` but I would like you to
such censors were more merciful and less scrupulous, without
stick to the atoms of the very clear sun of the work of which they murmur; Yes
allocating bonus dormat Homerus, consider how long he was awake,
for giving the light of his work with the least shadow that he could; and maybe i could
be that what seems wrong to them were moles, that sometimes
they increase the beauty of the face that has them; and so, I say that it is
The risk to which the one who prints a book puts himself is great, being of all
impossible impossible to compose such, that satisfies and content everyone
those who read.
"He who deals with me," said Don Quixote, "will have satisfied few."
-Before it is the other way around; that, as de stultorum infinitus est numerus, infinite
They are the ones who have liked such a story; and some have lacked and
fraud in the memory of the author, because he forgets to tell who the
thief who stole the red deer from Sancho, who does not declare himself there, and only
infers from what was written that they were stolen from him, and from then on we see him
horse on the same donkey, without having seemed. They also say that
forgot to put what Sancho made of those hundred shields that he found in the
suitcase in Sierra Morena, which never names them again, and there are many who wish
know what he did of them, or what he spent them on, which is one of the points
substantial missing from the work.
-Sancho replied:
-I, Mr. Samson, I am not here now to put myself in accounts or stories; that
I have fainted in my stomach, that if I do not repair it with two drinks of
I old it, it will put me in the thorn of Santa Lucia. At home I have it, my hear it
awaits me; in finishing eating, I will turn around, and satisfy your
thank everyone for what they want to ask, as well as the loss
of the donkey as of the expense of the hundred escudos.
And, without waiting for an answer or saying another word, he went home.
Don Quixote asked and begged the bachelor to stay and do penance with him.
The bachelor had the stake: he stayed, a couple of
pigeons, it was discussed at the cavalry table, Carrasco's humor followed,
The banquet was over, they took a nap, Sancho returned and renewed
past talk.
Chapter IV. Where Sancho Panza meets the bachelor Sansón Carrasco from
your doubts and questions, with other events worth knowing and telling
Sancho returned to Don Quixote's house, and, returning to the past reasoning,
said:
-To which Mr. Samson said that he wanted to know who, or how, or when
the donkey was stolen from me, answering I say that the night itself that, fleeing
of the Santa Hermandad, we entered Sierra Morena, after the
unfortunate adventure of the galley slaves and that of the deceased who
Segovia, my lord and I got into a thicket, where my lord
leaning on his spear, and I on my white, crushed and tired of the past
skirmishes, we went to sleep as if it were on four mattresses of
feather; I especially slept with such heavy sleep, that whoever it was
took place of reaching and suspending me on four stakes that he placed
four sides of the pack, so he left me riding on it, and
He pulled the rook out from under me, without my feeling it.
-That is an easy thing, and not a new event, that the same happened to
Sacripante when, being in the fence of Albraca, with that same invention
the famous thief called
Brunelo.
`` It dawned, '' Sancho continued, `` and I had hardly shuddered, when,
missing the stakes, I hit the ground with me a great fall; I looked for him
donkey, and I did not see him; Tears came to my eyes, and I made a
lamentation, which if the author of our story did not put it, can make
account that did not put good thing. After I don't know how many days, coming with
Lady Princess Micomicona, I met my ass, and it was coming upon him in
gypsy habit that Ginés de Pasamonte, that liar and great
maleador that my lord and I removed from the chain.
Samson replied, "This is not the mistake, but rather that, before having
similar to the donkey, says the author that Sancho was riding in the same
gray.
`` To that, '' said Sancho, `` I don't know what to answer, but the historian
he cheated, or it would be the printer's carelessness.
"Indeed it is," said Samson; but what did the hundred shields do ?;
Did they come undone?
Sancho replied:
-I spent them on behalf of myself and my wife, and my children, and
They have been the cause of my wife taking the roads and paths with patience.
careers that I have walked serving my lord Don Quixote; yes, after
so long, I returned without white and without the donkey to my house, black luck
I expected; And if there is more to know about me, here I am, that I will respond to
same king in prison, and no one has to meddle in whether or not he truje
truje, if I spent or did not spend; what if the clubs they gave me on these trips
they would have to be paid in money, although they were not appraised but at four maravedís
each one, in another hundred escudos there was not to pay me half; and each one
put your hand on his chest, and do not judge white for black and
black for white; that each one is as God made him, and even worse many
times.
"I'll be careful," said Carrasco, "to accuse the author of the story that if
print it again, do not forget what good Sancho has said,
which will enhance her a good preserve more than she is.
- Is there anything else to amend in that legend, Mr. Bachelor? asked Don
Quixote.
"Yes, there must be," he replied, "but none must be of the
importance of those already mentioned.
"And by chance," said Don Quixote, "does the author promise the second part?"
"Yes, he promises," replied Samson, "but he says he has not found or knows who
It does, and thus, we are in doubt whether it will come out or not; and so for this as for why
some say: "Never were second parts good", and others: "Of the
things of Don Quixote are enough written ", it is doubted that there must not be
second part; although some who are more jovial than Saturnians say:
"Come more quixote: Don Quixote attack and speak Sancho Panza, and let him be
Whatever, we are content with that ".
-And what does the author abide by?
`` What, '' replied Samson, `` in finding that the story finds, that he goes
searching with extraordinary diligence, he will then give it to the stamp,
led more from interest than from giving it is followed than from other praise
some.
To which Sancho said:
- At money and interest does the author look? Wonder it will be that you get it right, because
he will do nothing but harbar, harbar, as a tailor on the eve of Easter, and
works that are done quickly are never finished with the perfection they require.
Attend that Moorish gentleman, or what he is, to see what he does; that me and my lord
we will give you so much rubble at hand in terms of adventures and events
different, that can compose not only second part, but hundred. Must
think the good man, without a doubt, that we fell asleep here in the straws; then
give us your foot when shoeing, and you will see what we sew on. What I know how to say is
that if my lord took my advice, we would already be in those campaigns
undoing grievances and straightening one-eyed, as is the use and custom of
good errant gentlemen.
Sancho had not finished saying these reasons, when they reached their
Rocinante's whinny ears; which neighs Don Quixote took for
very happy omen, and determined to make another three or four days
Exit; and, declaring his intention to the bachelor, asked him for advice why
part would begin their journey; who replied that it was his opinion that
went to the kingdom of Aragon and to the city of Zaragoza, where, from there a few
days, they had to do some very sunny jousts for the feast of San
Jorge, in which he could gain fame over all the gentlemen
Aragonese, which would be to win it over everyone in the world. Praise him be
his determination, most honored and most courageous, and warned him to walk more
attempt to undertake the dangers, because his life was not his, but of
all those who needed him to protect and help them
in their misadventures.
"Deso is what I deny, Mr. Samson," said Sancho at this point, "that
this is how my lord attacks a hundred armed men like a half-greedy boy
dozen badeas. Body of the world, Mr. Bachelor! Yes, what times are there
to rush and times to withdraw; yes, it doesn't have to be everything "Santiago, and
close, Spain! "And more, that I have heard say, and I believe that my lord himself,
if I remember correctly, that in the cowardly and reckless weights is the
means of bravery; and if this is so, I do not want him to run away without having to
what, nor that he rushes when too much asks for something else. But above all
I advise my lord that if he is to take me with him, it must be on condition
that he has to fight everything, and that I should not be obliged to another
thing to look out for his person in what concerns his cleanliness and his
present; that in this I will dance the water in front of him; but to think that I have of
put hand to the sword, even against villains wicked ax and
chapel, is to think about the toilet. I, Mr. Samson, do not plan to farm
fame of brave, but of the best and most loyal squire who ever served
errant knight; and if my lord Don Quixote, obliged of my many and
good services, I would like to give me some insula of the many that your mercy
He says he has to bump into there, I will receive a lot of mercy for that; and when not
give it to me, I am born, and man should not live in the house of another but of
God; and more, how well, and maybe even better, the ungoverned bread will taste to me
that being governor; And do I know by chance if in those governments it has me
the devil rigged some trip where I stumble and fall and do the
grinders? Sancho I was born, and Sancho I plan to die; but if with all this, of
good to good, without much request and without much risk, the
heaven some island, or something similar, I am not so foolish that the
discarded; which is also said: "When they give you the heifer, run with the
soguilla "; and" When good comes, put it in your house. "
"You, brother Sancho," said Carrasco, "have spoken like a professor;
But, with all that, trust in God and in Don Quixote, who will give you
give a kingdom, not an island.
"It is both the most and the least," answered Sancho; although I know how to say to
Mr. Carrasco that my lord did not throw away the kingdom that he gave me on deaf ears,
that I have taken the pulse of myself, and I am healthy to rule
kingdoms and rule islands, and this I have already told my lord before.
`` Look, Sancho, '' said Samson, `` that trades change customs, and
It could be that seeing you, Governor, you do not know the mother who gave birth to you.
-That there must be understood -answered Sancho- with those who were born in the
mallows, and not with those who have four fingers of substance on their souls
Old Christians, like I have them. No, but come to my condition, that
You will know how to use ungratefulness with someone!
"God do it," said Don Quixote, "and it will say when the government comes;" that
I already think that I bring him between the eyes.
Having said this, he begged the bachelor if he was a poet, to do him the mercy of
compose some verses for him that dealt with the farewell he intended to make of his
Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, and to notice that at the beginning of each
verse had to put a letter of his name, so that at the end of the
verses, joining the first letters, read: Dulcinea del Toboso.
The bachelor replied that, since he was not one of the famous poets who
there were in Spain, who said there were only three and a half, that they would not
to compose such meters, although he found great difficulty in his
composition, because the letters that contained the name were ten and
seven; and that if he did four Castilian songs of four verses, there would be a surplus
lyrics; And if out of five, who they call tenths or rounds, three were missing
letters; but, with all that, I would try to embed a letter as best
could, so that in the four Castilian names the name of
Dulcinea del Toboso.
"It must be so in any case," said Don Quixote; that if the name does not go there
patent and manifest, there is no woman who believes that for her they were made
the meters.
They agreed on this and that the departure would be eight days from there. Commissioned gift
Quixote kept it secret from the bachelor, especially the priest and master
Nicolás, and his niece and mistress, because they did not interfere with his honorable and
courageous determination. Carrasco promised everything. With this he said goodbye,
entrusting Don Quixote that of all his good or bad events
be notified, having comfort; and so, they said goodbye, and Sancho went to put in
order what is necessary for your day.
Chapter V. Of the discreet and graceful conversation that passed between Sancho Panza and
his wife Teresa Panza, and other events worthy of happy remembrance
(As the translator wrote this story this fifth chapter, he says
which is apocryphal, because in it Sancho Panza speaks with another style
Of the one who could be promised of his short wit, and says such subtle things,
that it is not possible for him to know them; but he did not want to stop
translate it, for complying with what he owed to his job; and so he continued
saying:)
Sancho came home so overjoyed and cheerful that his wife met his
joy at crossbow shooting; so much so that he forced her to ask him:
-What do you bring, Sancho friend, how happy are you?
To which he replied:
-My woman, if God wanted, I would be happy not to be so happy
as i show.
"I don't understand you, husband," she replied, "and I don't know what you mean by
that you rejoice, God willing, not to be happy; what maguer
silly, I don't know who gets pleasure from not having him.
"Look, Teresa," answered Sancho, "I am happy because I have determined
to return to serve my master Don Quixote, who wants the third time
go out and seek adventures; and I go out with him again, because he wants it
thus my need, together with the hope, which makes me happy, to think if I can
find another hundred escudos like those already spent, since I am saddened by the
having to separate myself from you and my children; and if God wanted to feed me
on foot lean and in my house, without taking me through twists and turns, well
I could do it at little cost and no more than wanting it, of course my joy
was firmer and more valid, since the one I have is mixed with the
sadness of leaving you; So, I said well let it be, God willing, of
not be happy.
`` Look, Sancho, '' Teresa replied, `` after you became a member of
knight errant you speak in such a surrounded way, that there is no one
in shop.
-It is enough that God understands me, woman -answered Sancho-, that He is the
understanding of all things, and keep this here; and warn, sister,
that it is convenient for you to take account of these three days with the red deer, so that
be ready for arms to take: fold the feed, require the pack and the
other rigging, because we are not going to weddings, but to go around the world, and to have
give and take with giants, with endriages and with vestiges, and to hear
whistles, roars, bellows and whines; and even all this were flowers of
cantueso if we didn't have to understand with yangüeses and with moors
delighted.
`` Well, I think, husband, '' replied Teresa, `` that errant squires do not eat
the bucket bread; and thus, I will remain praying to Our Lord to take you out of
such bad luck.
"I tell you, woman," answered Sancho, "that if I did not think before long
time to see myself governor of an island, here I would drop dead.
"Not that, my husband," said Teresa, "long live the hen, even with her
nugget; Long live you, and the devil take away how many governments there are in the world;
Without government you came out of your mother's womb, without government you have
lived until now, and without government you will go, or they will take you, to the grave
when God is served. Like those in the world who live without
government, and for that reason they do not cease to live and be counted in the number of
people. The best sauce in the world is hunger; and as this one does not miss the
poor, they always eat with gusto. But look, Sancho: if by any chance you
You see any government, do not forget me and your children.
Notice that Sanchico is already fifteen full years old, and it is reason that he goes to
school, if his uncle the abbot is to leave him in fact of the Church.
See also that Mari Sancha, your daughter, will not die if we marry her;
that is giving me hints that you want to have a husband as much as you want
see you with government; and, well, well, the poorly married daughter seems better than
well encompassed.
"In good faith," answered Sancho, "that if God has something for me, what of
government, that I have to marry, my wife, Mari Sancha so highly that
reach her but call her lady.
`` Not that, Sancho, '' Teresa answered, `` marry her to her equal, which is the most
right; that if you take it out of your clogs to chapines, and out of a brown skirt
fourteen to executioner and silk savoy, and from a Sissy and a you to a
Mrs. such and your honor, the mochacha is not to be found, and at every step it has to
fall into a thousand faults, discovering the yarn of its coarse and coarse cloth.
"Hush, silly," said Sancho, "it will all be to use it for two or three years; that
later will come the dominion and the gravity like mold; and when not, what
does it matter? Be her ladyship, and come what may.
"Means, Sancho, with your state," Teresa answered; do not want to lift
older people, and notice the saying that says: "Clean your neighbor's son
noses and put him in your house. "By the way, it would be a nice thing to marry
to our Maria with a condazo, or with a gentleman who, when
whished, put her like new, calling her a villain, daughter of
lump ripper and rock peeler! Not in my days, husband! For that,
by the way, I raised my daughter! Bring you money, Sancho, and marry her
leave it to me; that there is Lope Tocho, the son of Juan Tocho, waiter
plump and healthy, and that we know him, and I know that
mochacha; and with him, who is our equal, she will be well married, and
we will always have in our eyes, and we will all be one, parents and children,
grandchildren and sons-in-law, and the peace and blessing of God will go among all
us; and not marry her now in those courts and in those palaces
great, where neither she is understood, nor she is understood.
"Come here, beast and wife of Barabbas," replied Sancho, "why do you want to
now, without what or why, to hinder me from marrying my daughter with whom I
give grandchildren called lordship? Look, Teresa: I've always heard my
greater than the one who does not know how to enjoy happiness when it comes, who does not
You must complain if you miss. And it wouldn't be nice that now, you're calling
our door, let us close it; let us be carried away by this favorable wind that
blows us.
(Because of this way of speaking, and because of what Sancho says below, the
translator of this story that made this chapter apocryphal.)
`` Don't you think, animalia, '' Sancho continued, `` that it will be good to find my
body in some profitable government that gets us out of the mud? And get married
to Mari Sancha with whom I want, and you will see how they call you doña
Teresa Panza, and you sit in the church on alcatifa, pillows and
Arambeles, despite and in spite of the nobles of the town. No, but be
always in a being, without growing or diminishing, as a face figure! And in
Let's not talk about this anymore, that Sanchica must be a countess, although you
you say.
"Do you see how much you say, husband?" Teresa answered. Well, with all that, I fear
that this county of my daughter must be her undoing. You do what
you wish, pray you make her a duchess or princess, but I can tell you that it will not be
this with my will or consent. Always, brother, I was friends with the
equality, and I can't see us without foundation. Teresa put me in the
baptism, cute and concise name, without additions or restrictions, or
arrequives of gifts or donuts; Cascajo was called my father, and me, for being
your wife, they call me Teresa Panza, who for good reason had given me
call Teresa Cascajo. But there go kings do want laws, and with this
name I'm happy, without putting a gift on it, that weighs so much that
I can not take him, and I do not want to give what to say to those who see me walk
dressed like the countess or the governor, who will later say: `` Look what
intoned the pazpuerca goes !; yesterday he was not tired of stretching a flake of
tow, and went to mass covered the head with the skirt of the skirt, instead
of cloak, and already today he goes with executioner, with clasps and with tone, as if not
get to know her. '' If God keeps my seven, or my five senses, or the
I have, I am not going to give the opportunity to see myself in such a predicament. You brother
Gone to be government or island, and sing to your liking; that my daughter nor
I, for the century of my mother, that we have not to change a step of our
village: the honored woman, the broken leg, and at home; and the maiden
Honestly, doing something is your party. Gone with your don Quixote to
your adventures, and leave us to our misfortunes, which
God will improve them as we are good; and I do not know, by the way, who
He gave him a gift, which his parents and his wits did not have.
"Now I say," replied Sancho, "that you have a relative in that body."
God, woman, and what things have you threaded one in another, without
have no head or tail! What does the Gravel, the brooches, the
sayings and the tone with what I say? Come here, foolish and ignorant
(That is how I can call you, because you do not understand my reasons and you are fleeing from
happiness): if I said that my daughter jumped down from a tower, or that she
out of those worlds, as the Infanta Doña Urraca wanted to go, you had
reason not to come with my taste; but if in two pallets, and in less than one
blink of an eye, I'll give you a gift and a lordship in tow, and
I take it out of the stubble, and I put it in an awning and on a base, and in a
dais of more hairy pillows that had Moors in their lineage the
Moroccan pillows, why don't you have to consent and want what I
want?
"Do you know why, husband?" Teresa answered; for the saying that says:
"Who covers you, discovers you!" Through the poor all eyes pass as of
run, and in the rich they are arrested; and if such a rich man was a poor time,
there is the murmuring and the cursing, and the worst perseverance of the
cursing, that there are in those streets in droves, like swarms of
bees
"Look, Teresa," answered Sancho, "and listen to what I now want to tell you;
maybe you have not heard it in all the days of your life, and now I do not speak
of mine; that all I think to say are sentences of the preacher father
that last Lent he preached in this town, which, if not wrong,
agree, said that all the things present that the eyes are looking at are
present, are and attend in our memory much better and with more
vehemence than the past.
(All these reasons that Sancho is saying here are the second for whom
says the translator who considers this chapter apocryphal, that they exceed the
Sancho's ability. Which he continued saying :)
-Where is it born that, when we see a well-dressed person, and with rich
Composed dresses, and with servants' pomp, it seems that by force it moves us
and invites us to respect it, since the memory in that
moment represents us some baseness in which we saw such a person; the
which inominia, now be it of poverty or of lineage, as it already happened, it is not, and
It is only what we see present. And if this one whom fortune took from
draft of his baseness (which for the same reasons was said by the father) to the
highness of his prosperity, be well brought up, liberal and courteous to all, and
not be put in tales with those who by antiquity are noble, have
By the way, Teresa, there will be no one who remembers what it was, but
reverence what it is, if it were not the invidious, whose
prosperous fortune is sure.
`` I don't understand you, husband, '' replied Teresa, `` do what you want, and don't
you break my head even more with your harangues and rhetoric. And if you are
mixed up in doing what you say ...
"You must say, resolved, woman," said Sancho, "and not stirred."
"Don't start arguing, husband, with me," Teresa answered. I speak
how God is served, and I don't get into any more drawings; and I say that if you are
insisting on having a government, that you take your son Sancho with you,
so that from now on you teach him to have a government, how good it is that the
children inherit and learn the trades of their parents.
`` In having a government, '' said Sancho, `` I will send for him by the post, and
I will send money, which I will not lack, because there is never a lack of someone who will lend it to
governors when they don't have them; and dress him so that he hides what
what it is and what it seems to be.
"Send money," Teresa said, "I'll dress it for you like a palm."
"Indeed, we agreed," said Sancho, "that she must be a countess
our daughter.
`` The day I see her as a Countess, '' Teresa replied, `` that will tell me that the
burial, but again I tell you to do what you like, that with
this burden we women are born, of being obedient to their husbands, although
be some joints.
And, in this, he began to cry so truly as if he already saw dead and
buried Sanchica. Sancho consoled her by telling her that, since he had
to become a countess, he would do her all as late as possible. With this I know
finished his talk, and Sancho returned to see Don Quixote to give order in his
departure.
Chapter VI. Of what happened to Don Quixote with his niece and his mistress, and
is one of the important chapters of all history
While Sancho Panza and his wife Teresa Cascajo spent the impertinent
said talk, Don Quixote's niece and mistress were not idle,
that for a thousand signs they were finding that his uncle and lord wanted to tear himself apart
the third time, and return to the exercise of their, for them, bad walker
cavalry: they tried by all possible means to separate him from so bad
thought, but it was all preaching in the desert and pounding in cold iron. With
All this, among many other reasons that happened with him, the mistress told him:
Truly, my lord, if your grace does not affirm the level foot and is
He stayed at home, and he stopped walking through the mountains and valleys like
soul in pain, looking for those that they say are called adventures, whom I
I call misfortunes, that I have to complain loudly and loudly to God and the king,
to remedy it.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-Mistress, what God will answer to your complaints I do not know, nor what
answer His Majesty either, and I only know that if I were a king, I would excuse myself
to respond to so many impertinent memorials as every day
give; that one of the greatest jobs that kings have, among others
many, it is being obliged to listen to all and to respond to all; and
Thus, I would not want my things to give him grief.
To which the mistress said:
"Tell us, sir: in His Majesty's court, are there no knights?"
"Yes," answered Don Quixote, "and many;" and it is reason that there are, for adornment
of the greatness of princes and for the ostentation of royal majesty.
`` Well, wouldn't your mercy be, '' she replied, `` one of those who remained on foot
serve their king and lord, while at court?
Look, friend, Don Quixote answered, not all gentlemen can be
courtiers, not all courtiers can and should not be knights
andantes: of all there must be in the world; and, although we are all
Gentlemen, it is very different from each other; because the
courtiers, without leaving their chambers or the thresholds of the court,
they walk around the world, looking at a map, without costing them money, or suffering
heat neither cold, hunger nor thirst; but we knights errant
true, in the sun, in the cold, in the air, in the inclemencies of the sky,
night and day, on foot and on horseback, we measure the whole earth with our
same feet; and we not only know the enemies painted, but in their
same being, and at all times and at all times we undertake them, without looking in
childish things, nor in the laws of challenges; if it is wearing, or not wearing, shorter
the spear, or the sword; if he brings relics, or some deception
covert; if the sun is to be split and sliced, or not, with other
ceremonies of this kind, which are used in the particular challenges of a person
to person, that you do not know and I do. And you have to know more: that the good
knight errant, although he sees ten giants who with their heads not only
touch, but the clouds pass, and that each one has two legs
very great towers, and that the arms resemble trees of thick and powerful
ships, and each eye like a great mill wheel and burning hotter than a
glass oven, they are not to scare you away in any way; before with gentle
continent and with intrepid heart he has to attack and ram them, and, if
if possible, defeat and destroy them in a small instant, although
came armed with some shells of a certain fish that they say are more
harder than if they were made of diamonds, and instead of swords they carried knives
blades of damascene steel, or ferred clubs with tips likewise
steel, as I have seen them more than twice. All this I have said, my love,
because you see the difference between some gentlemen and others; and it would be reason
that there was no prince who did not esteem this second one more, or, for the better
that is to say, the first species of knights-errant, who, according to what we read in their
stories, such has been among them that it has been the health not only of a
kingdom, but many.
"Ah, my lord!" said the niece at this time; warn your mercy
that all that he says about knights errant is fable and lie, and his
stories, since they did not burn them, they deserved that each one
sambenito, or some sign in which she was known for being infamous and for wasting
of good manners.
`` By the God who sustains me, '' said Don Quixote, `` if you weren't my
niece rightly, as the daughter of my own sister, who had to make a
such punishment on you, for the blasphemy you have said, that it will sound throughout the
world. How is it possible that a raptor that barely knows how to wag twelve
chopsticks dares to put his tongue out and censor the stories of
the knights errant? What would Mr. Amadís say if he heard it? But
surely he will forgive you, because he was the most humble and courteous
knight of his time, and, others, great protector of the maidens; more,
Maybe I could have heard that it was not good for you, that not all of them are
courteous and not well looked at: some are messy and unbridled. Not all
that are called gentlemen are everything in everything: that some are made of gold, others
alchemy, and they all look like knights, but not all can be up to
touch the stone of truth. Short men there are busting for
look like gentlemen, and tall gentlemen there seem to bet they die for
look like short men; those are carried away either with ambition or with
virtue, they lower themselves or with laziness or with vice; and it is necessary
take advantage of discrete knowledge to distinguish these two ways
of gentlemen, so alike in names and so distant in
Actions.
-God help me! said the niece. May your grace know so much, sir
uncle, who, if need be, could climb into a pulpit and
go preach on those streets, and that, with all this, give in a blindness
so great and in such a well-known nonsense, that it is implied that it is
brave, being old, having strength, being sick, and straightening
one-eyed, being overwhelmed by age, and, above all, that he is a gentleman, not
it being; because, although the noblemen may be, the poor are not!
"You are quite right, niece, in what you say," replied Don Quixote, "and
things I could tell you about the lineages, that they admire you; but for
not to mix the divine with the human, I am not saying them. Look, friends: four
lot of lineages, and stay tuned, you can reduce all there are
in the world, which are these: some, who had humble beginnings, and
They were stretching and dilating until they reached a great greatness; others, what
They had great principles, and they were conserving them and they conserve them and
they keep in the being they started; others, who, although they had principles
large, ended in a point, like a pyramid, having diminished and annihilated
its beginning until it stops at nonada, as is the tip of the pyramid, which
respect of its base or seat is nothing; there are others, and these are the most,
that they had neither a good beginning nor a reasonable middle, and thus they will have an end,
nameless, like the lineage of commoner and ordinary people. Of the
first, who had a humble beginning and rose to the greatness that now
preserve, let the Ottoman House serve as an example, which, from a humble and low
Shepherd who started it, is at the top that we see him. Of the second
lineage, which began in greatness and preserves it without increasing it, will be
example many princes who by inheritance are, and are preserved in it,
without increasing or decreasing it, restraining itself within the limits of its states
peaceably. Of those that started great and ended up in a point there are
thousands of examples, because all the Pharaohs and Ptolemies of Egypt, the
Caesars of Rome, with all the caterva, if he can be given this
name, of infinite princes, monarchs, lords, Medes, Assyrians, Persians,
Greeks and barbarians, all these lineages and lordships have ended in point and
in nonada, both they and those who started them, for it will not be
It is now possible to find any of his descendants, and if we found him, it would be
in low and humble state. Of the commoner lineage I have nothing to say, but
it only serves to increase the number of those who live, without deserving another
fame or other praise for his greatness. From all that has been said, I want you to infer,
fools of mine, that the confusion between the lineages is great, and that
They alone seem great and illustrious that show it in virtue, and
in the wealth and liberality of its owners. I said virtues, riches and
liberalities, because the great who is vicious will be the great vicious, and the
rich non-liberal will be a miser beggar; that the possessor of wealth does not
It makes him happy to have them, but to spend them, and not to spend them
anyway, but knowing how to spend them well. The poor gentleman has no
another way to show that he is a gentleman but that of virtue, being
affable, well-bred, courteous and restrained, and officious; not superb, no
arrogant, non-murmuring, and, above all, charitable; that with two maravedís
who with a cheerful spirit gives to the poor will be as liberal as the one who
wounded bell gives alms, and there will be no one who will see him adorned with
referred to virtues that, even if you do not know him, stop judging him and have him
for being of good caste, and not being one would be a miracle; and always the praise was
prize of virtue, and the virtuous cannot fail to be praised. Two
There are roads, daughters, by which men can go to become rich and
honest: the one is that of letters; another, that of weapons. I have more
weapons than letters, and I was born, as I bow to arms, under the
influence of the planet Mars; So, I almost have to keep going for her
way, and for him I have to go despite everyone, and it will be in vain
get tired of persuading me not to want what the heavens want, the
fortune orders and reason asks, and above all, my will desires. Because with
know, as I know, the innumerable jobs that are attached to the errant
chivalry, I also know the infinite goods that are achieved with it; and
that the path of virtue is very narrow, and the path of vice, wide and
spacious; and I know that their ends and whereabouts are different, because that of the
Vice, long and spacious, ends in death, and that of virtue, narrow
and laborious, it ends in life, and not in life that ends, but in the one that does not
will have an end; and I know, as our great Castilian poet says, that
Through these rough edges you walk
from immortality to the high seat,
never up who declines from there.
"Oh, unfortunate me," said the niece, "my lord is also a poet!"
He knows everything, he achieves everything: I will bet that if I wanted to be a bricklayer, that
knew how to make a house like a cage.
I promise you, niece, "replied Don Quixote," that if these thoughts
chivalrous did not take all my senses after them, that there would be nothing
that I did not do, nor curiosity that it did not get out of my hands, especially
cages and toothpicks.
At this time, there was a knock on the door, and, asking who was knocking,
Sancho Panza answered that he was; and, as soon as the mistress had known him,
when she ran to hide for not seeing him: she hated him so much. He opened the
niece, came out to receive him with open arms his lord Don Quixote, and
The two shut themselves up in their room, where they had another colloquy, which
the past has an advantage.
Chapter VII. Of what Don Quixote happened with his squire, with other
famous events
The mistress scarcely saw that Sancho Panza was shutting himself up with his lord, when he
the account of your deals; and, imagining that from that consultation
come out the resolution of his third exit and taking his mantle, all full of
grief and sorrow, he went to look for the bachelor Sansón Carrasco,
seeming to him that, being well spoken and a fresh friend of his lord, he
It might persuade you to give up such a wild purpose.
She found him walking in the courtyard of his house, and, seeing him, dropped down before
her feet, leaking and heartbroken. When Carrasco saw her with such samples
sore and startled, she said:
-What is this, lady mistress? What has happened to him that seems to be
want to rip out the soul?
-It is nothing, my Lord Samson, but my master is leaving; Get out without a doubt!
-And where does it come out, ma'am? Samson asked. Has any part broken
from his body?
"He does not come out," she answered, "but through the door of his madness." Want
say, Mr. Bachelor of my soul, that you want to go out again, that with this
will be the third, to search for that world what he calls fortunes, which I do not
I can understand how you give them this name. The first time they returned to us
crossed on a donkey, ground with sticks. The second came in a cart of
oxen, put and locked in a cage, where he implied that
I was delighted; and the sad one was coming, that the mother did not know him
gave birth to him: skinny, yellow, eyes sunk in the last chambers
brain, which, in order to have him come back to himself somewhat, I spent more than
six hundred eggs, as God and everyone knows, and my chickens, who
they won't let me lie.
"I think so very well," replied the bachelor; that they are so good,
So fat and so well raised, they won't say one thing for another, yeah
resold. Indeed, mistress, is there nothing else, nor has another
any mismanagement, except the one who fears what Mr. Don Quixote wants to do?
"No, sir," she replied.
`` Well, don't be sorry, '' replied the bachelor, `` but go at good time to
your house, and have me spiced up with something hot for lunch, and
way, go praying the prayer of Saint Apollonia if you know it, that I
I'll go there later, and you will see wonders.
"Take care of me!" -replied the mistress-; Does the prayer of Saint Apollonia say
May I pray?
but it has only been from the helmets.
-I know what I'm saying, lady mistress: go away and don't start arguing with me,
Well, he knows that I am a bachelor in Salamanca, that there is nothing else to do
Carrasco replied.
And with this, the mistress left, and the bachelor then went to look for the priest, to
communicate with him what will be said in due time.
In which Don Quixote and Sancho were locked up, the reasons passed
that with a lot of punctuality and true relationship tells the story.
Sancho said to his master:
-Sir, I already have my wife glistening to let me go with your mercy
Where do you want to take me?
"Reduced, you must say, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "not glistening."
`` Once or twice, '' answered Sancho, `` if I remember correctly, I have begged
your grace, do not understand the words, if you understand what
I mean in them, and that, when I don't understand them, say: '' Sancho, or
devil, I don't understand you ''; And if I don't declare myself, then you can
amend me; that I am so easy ...
`` I don't understand you, Sancho, '' Don Quixote said later, `` because I don't know what he wants.
Say I'm so easy
"That is so easy," answered Sancho, "I am so like that."
"Less I understand you now," replied Don Quixote.
`` Well, if you can't understand me, '' Sancho answered, `` I don't know how to say it: I don't know
more, and God be with me.
`` Yes, I fall, '' answered Don Quixote, `` in it: you mean that you are
so docile, soft and tricky that you will take what I tell you, and you will go through
what I will teach you.
`` I'll bet, '' said Sancho, `` that from the beginning he got me and understood me,
but he wanted to upset me by hearing me say another dozen shits.
"Could be," replied Don Quixote. And indeed, what does Teresa say?
`` Teresa says, '' Sancho said, `` tie my finger well with your mercy, and that
talk cards and keep quiet beards, because whoever shuffles does not shuffle, then more
It is worth one take that two I will give you. And I say that the advice of women is little,
and the one who does not take it is crazy.
"And I say so too," answered Don Quixote. Say, Sancho friend; pass
Go ahead and talk about pearls today.
`` It is the case, '' replied Sancho, `` that, as your worship knows best, all
We are subject to death, and that we are today and not tomorrow, and how soon
the lamb leaves like the ram, and that n one can promise himself in this
world more hours of life than God wants to give it, because death is
deaf, and when it comes to knocking on the doors of our lives, it always goes
suddenly and they will not stop her, neither pleas, nor forces, nor brushes, nor
mitras, according to public voice and fame, and as we are told by those
pulpits.
"All that is true," said Don Quixote, "but I don't know where you're going to stop."
`` I'm going to stop, '' said Sancho, `` when your grace points me to a known salary.
of what he has to give me each month the time that will serve him, and that he
salary is paid to me from your estate; that I do not want to be mercedes, that
they are late, or bad, or never; God help me with mine. Anyway, I want
to know what I earn, little or much, that on an egg puts the
hen, and many few make a lot, and while something is gained I do not know
loses nothing. It is true that if it happened, which I neither believe nor expect,
May your grace give me the island that you have promised me, I am not so
ungrateful, nor do I take things so closely that I will not want it to be appreciated
what I will mount the rent of that island, and it is deducted from my cat salary
by quantity.
`` Sancho amigo, '' answered Don Quixote, `` sometimes, so good is a
cat like a rat.
"I understand," said Sancho, "I'll bet he had to say rat, and not cat;"
but nothing matters, because your grace has understood me.
`` And so understood, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that I have penetrated the last of your
thoughts, and I know the target you shoot with the innumerable arrows of your
sayings. Look, Sancho: I would well point you a salary, if I had found in
some of the stories of the knights errant example that me
discover and show, by some small loophole, what they used to
earn every month, or every year; but I have read all or most of his
stories, and I don't remember reading that any knight-errant ever
noted well-known salary to his squire. I just know that they all served
mercy, and that, at least they thought, if their masters had been
good luck, they were rewarded with an insula, or another
equivalent thing, and, at least, they were with title and lordship. If with
these hopes and accessories you, Sancho, like to serve me again,
be in good time: what to think that I have to get out of your terms and quickens
The old fashioned way of cavalry errant is to think about the toilet. A) Yes
that, my Sancho, return to your house, and declare to your Teresa my
intention; and if she likes it and you like to be at the mercy of me,
bene quidem; and if not, as friends as before; what if the loft does not
it lacks bait, it will not lack pigeons. And warn, son, that it is worth more good
hope that a bad possession, and a good complaint that bad pay. I talk about this
way, Sancho, for letting you understand that I also know how to throw
sayings like rained. And, finally, I want to say, and I tell you, that if not
you want to come to mercy with me and run the fate that I run, that God
stay with you and make you a saint; that I will not lack squires anymore
Obedient, more solicitous, and not as stuffy or talkative as you.
When Sancho heard the firm resolution of his master, the sky clouded over
the wings of his heart fell, because he believed that his lord did not
I would go without him for all the assets of the world; and so, being suspended and
thoughtfully, Samson Carrasco and his niece entered, eager to hear what
Reasons persuaded his master not to turn to seek adventure. I arrive
Samson, famous sly, and, hugging him like the first time and with a voice
raised, she said:
-O flower of the errant cavalry; oh blazing light of arms; oh
honor and mirror of the Spanish nation! Plead almighty God, where else
long it is contained, that the person or persons who put an impediment
and hinder your third exit, that they do not find it in the labyrinth of their
desires, and what they badly desire is never fulfilled.
And, turning to the mistress, he said:
-May well, the lady loves not to pray the prayer of Saint Apollonia any more, than I
I know that it is a precise determination of the spheres that Mr. Don Quixote
rerun your high and new thoughts, and I would greatly commission my
conscience if he did not intimate and persuade this gentleman to have no more
time shrunk and stopped the strength of his brave arm and the goodness of his
courageous courage, because with its delay it disappoints the right of
one-eyed, the protection of orphans, the honor of maidens, the favor of
widows and married women, and other things like this that touch,
they concern, depend on and are attached to the order of the errant knighthood. Hey,
Mr. Don Quixote of mine, beautiful and brave, before today that tomorrow
your grace and his greatness on the way; and if something is missing for
put it into execution, here I am to supply it with my person and
tax authorities; and if it is necessary to serve your magnificence as a squire,
I will have a very happy luck!
At this time, Don Quixote said, turning to Sancho:
"Didn't I tell you, Sancho, that I had more than enough squires?" Look who i know
offers to be, but the unprecedented bachelor Samson Carrasco, perpetual
upset and joyous of the patios of the schools of Salamanca, healthy
of his person, agile of his limbs, quiet, suffering from heat as well as
from the cold, from hunger as well as from thirst, with all those parts that
required to be a squire to a knight errant. But don't allow the
heaven that, to follow my taste, disarm and break the column of
letters and the glass of sciences, and break the eminent palm of good
and liberal arts. Let the new Samson stay in his homeland, and, honoring it,
Honor together the gray hair of your elderly parents; that I with any
Squire I will be happy, since Sancho does not deign to come with me.
"Yes, worthy," answered Sancho, touched and his eyes filled with tears; and
He continued, "It will not be said for me, my lord: the no-brainer and the company
undone; Yes, I do not come from some ungrateful lineage, you already know
everyone, and especially my people, who were the Panzas, whose
I say, and more, that I have known and penetrated by many good works, and
for more good words, the desire that your grace has to make me
mercy; and if I have taken into account as much more as about myself
salary, it was to please my wife; which, when she takes the hand of
persuade one thing, there is no mallet that tightens so much the rings of a vat as
she presses to do what she wants; but, in effect, man has to
be a man, and a woman, a woman; and, well, I am a man anywhere, I am not
I can deny, I also want to be at home, regardless of who I weigh; and so,
there is nothing else to do, but your Grace order his will with his
codicil, so that it cannot be wallowed, and then let's get on our way,
because the soul of Mr. Samson does not suffer, who says that his conscience
lita who persuades your mercy to leave the world for the third time; and me
again I offer myself to serve your mercy faithfully and legally, so well and
better than how many squires have served knights errant in the
past and present times.
The bachelor was amazed to hear the term and way of speaking of Sancho
Belly; that, since he had read the first story of his lord, he never
he thought it was as funny as they paint him there; but, hearing him say now
will and codicil that cannot be rolled, instead of will and
codicil that cannot be revoked, believed everything he had read about it, and
confirmed by one of the most solemn fools of our centuries; and said
each other that such two madmen as master and groom would not have seen each other in the
world.
Finally, Don Quixote and Sancho embraced and became friends, and with
the opinion and approval of the great Carrasco, who at that time was his oracle,
it was ordered that in three days he should be his departure; in which there would be
instead of dressing the necessary for the trip, and looking for a trap of
lace, which Don Quixote said he had to wear anyway.
Samson offered it to him, because he knew it would not be denied by a friend of his who
had, since it was darker from rust and mold than clear and
clean by the smooth steel.
The curses that the two, mistress and niece, cast on the bachelor
they had a story: they pulled their hair, scratched their faces, and, in the manner of
the dirges that were used, lamented the departure as if it were the
death of his lord. The design that Samson had, to persuade him that another
Once I got out, it was to do what the story tells later, all for advice
of the priest and the barber, with whom he had previously communicated it.
In resolution, in those three days Don Quixote and Sancho made themselves comfortable
what seemed to suit them; and, Sancho having appeased his wife, and
Don Quixote to his niece and mistress, at nightfall, without anyone seeing him,
but the bachelor, who wanted to accompany them half a league from the place,
set on the way to Toboso: Don Quixote on his good Rocinante, and
Sancho on his old rucio, provided the saddlebags with things related to
the bucolic, and the bag of money that Don Quixote gave him for what he
offered. Samson embraced him, and begged him to warn him of his good or bad
luck, to be happy with this or saddened with that, as the laws
they asked for their friendship. Don Quixote promised him, Samson turned his
place, and the two took that of the great city of Toboso.
Chapter VIII. Where is recounted what happened to Don Quixote, going to see
his wife Dulcinea del Toboso
'' Blessed be the mighty Allah! -said Hamete Benengeli at the beginning of this
eighth chapter-. Blessed be Allah! '' He repeats three times; and says that it gives
these blessings for seeing that you already have Don Quixote and Sancho in the field,
and that the readers of its pleasant story can realize that since
This point begins the exploits and gifts of Don Quixote and his
squire; persuade them to forget the past knights of the
ingenious gentleman, and set your eyes on those to come, that from
agora on the way to Toboso they begin, as the others began in the
Campos de Montiel, and he asks not much for as much as he promises; and
thus he continues saying:
Only Don Quixote and Sancho were left, and as soon as Samson had left,
when Rocinante began to whinny and sigh the red deer, which
both, knight and squire, it was considered a good sign and very happy
omen; although, if the truth is to be told, more were the sighs and
the braying of the rook than the neighing of the rocín, from which Sancho
his fortune was to outweigh and rise above his lord's,
based on I do not know if in judicial astrology that he knew, since the
history does not state it; they only heard him say that when he stumbled or fell,
would be glad not to have left the house, because stumbling or falling did not get
nothing but the broken shoe or the broken ribs; and, although silly,
he was not very out of the way in this. Don Quixote said to him:
-Sancho friend, the night is beginning to walk, and with more darkness
of which we had needed to reach to see Toboso with the day,
where I am determined to go before I put myself in another adventure, and there
I will take the blessing and good leave of the peerless Dulcinea, with which
leave I think and I am certain to finish and give a happy summit to all
dangerous adventure, because nothing in life makes men braver.
knights errant who find themselves favored by their ladies.
"I think so," answered Sancho; but I have it difficult for you
Please be able to talk to her or see her, in part, at least, that she can
receive your blessing, if it is no longer cast from the fences of the corral,
where I saw her the first time, when I brought her the letter where the
news of the nonsense and madness that your grace was doing in the
heart of Sierra Morena.
`` Bardas de corral did you fancy those, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote,
where or where you saw that never quite praised kindness and
loveliness? They must be nothing more than galleries or corridors, or fish markets, or as
they call them, of rich and royal palaces.
`` It could all have been, '' answered Sancho, `` but they seemed to me to be fences, if not
that I am lacking in memory.
`` With all that, let's go there, Sancho, '' replied Don Quixote, `` who, like me,
see, that happens to me whether it be for fences than for windows, or for cracks, or
garden gates; that any ray of the sun of its beauty reaches
my eyes will enlighten my understanding and strengthen my heart, so that
remain unique and unequaled in discretion and bravery.
"Well indeed, sir," answered Sancho, "that when I saw that sun of the
Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, who was not so clear, that she could
yes damn some, and it must have been that, as his mercy was doing that
wheat that I said, the much dust that it drew was put like a cloud before the
face and it darkened.
"You still give, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "in saying, in thinking, in believing
and in insisting that my lady Dulcinea made wheat, that being a necessity
and exercise that deviates from everything that people do and should do
that are constituted and saved for other exercises and
entertainments, which show their main character with crossbow shooting ...! Wrong
they remind you, oh Sancho!, those verses of our poet where
he paints for us the work that those
four nymphs who took their heads out of the beloved Tagus, and sat down
to work in the green meadow those rich fabrics that the ingenious poet
He describes to us that all of them were made of gold, sirgo and pearls, answered and woven. AND
This way it must have been that of my lady when you saw her; but the
envy that some charming evil must have my things, all that
I should like to barter and come back in different figures that they have;
And so, I fear that, in that story that they say is imprinted on my
feats, if by any chance a wise man has been their author my enemy, there will be
put one thing for another, mixing a thousand lies with one truth,
having fun counting other actions outside of what the
continuation of a true story. Oh envy, root of infinities
evils and woodworm of the virtues! All the vices, Sancho, bring an I don't know
what a delight I get, but envy brings nothing but displeasure,
rancores and rabies.
`` That's what I say too, '' answered Sancho, `` and I think that in that
legend or story that the bachelor Carrasco told us that we had
seen my honor must walk here, cinched, and, as they say, when
strict, here and there, sweeping the streets. Well, in good faith, no
I have said badly of any charmer, nor do I have as many goods as it may be
envied; Well it is true that I am somewhat malicious, and that I have my certain
you look like a knave, but everything covers it and covers the great layer of simplicity
mine, always natural and never artificial. And when something else did not have
but to believe, as I always believe, firmly and truly in God and in everything
what the Holy Roman Catholic Church has and believes, and being an enemy
mortal, as I am, of the Jews, historians must have had
mercy on me and treat me well in your writings. But say what
would like; that naked I was born, naked I am: I neither lose nor win; although,
for seeing me put on books and walking through that world from hand to hand, I do not
give a fig that they say everything they want about me.
"So it seems to me, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "to what happened to a famous
poet of these times, who, having made a malicious satire against
all the courtesan ladies, he did not put or name in her a lady who
I could doubt whether it was or not; which, seeing that it was not on the list of
the others, he complained to the poet, telling him that what he had seen in her to
not to put it in the number of the others, and to lengthen the satire, and the
put in the expansion; if not, let him look at what he was born for. Did it
thus the poet, and used it as they do not say owners, and she was satisfied, for
to be seen with fame, although infamous. Also comes with this what they say about
that shepherd who set fire and burned the famous temple of Diana, told by
one of the seven wonders of the world, just because its name remained alive
in the centuries to come; and, although no one was ordered to name him, nor
made by word or in writing mention of his name, because no
achieved the end of his desire, it was still known that his name was Erostratus.
Also alludes to this what happened to the great Emperor Carlo Quintus with a
knight in Rome. The emperor wanted to see that famous temple of the
Rotunda, which in ancient times was called the temple of all gods, and
now, with a better vocation, it is called of all saints, and it is the building
that has remained the most complete of those raised by gentility in Rome, and is the
that most preserves the fame of the grandeur and magnificence of its
founders: he is made of a better half, very great in extreme,
and it is very clear, without any other light entering it than that granted by a window,
or, to put it better, a round skylight at the top, from which
looking at the emperor the building, was with him and by his side a gentleman
Roman, declaring to him the delicacies and subtleties of that great machine and
memorable architecture; and, having removed himself from the skylight, said to the
Emperor: `` A thousand times, Holy Majesty, I had a desire to embrace myself with
your Majesty and throw me from that skylight below, to stop me
eternal fame in the world. '' "I thank you," replied the emperor, "for not
having put such a bad thought into effect, and from now on I will not put you
I on the occasion that you return to prove your loyalty; and so, you
I command that you never speak to me, or be where I am. '' And, after these
words, he did him a great boon. I mean, Sancho, that the desire to
achieving fame is very active. Who do you think threw
Horacio from the bridge below, armed with all weapons, in the depths of the
Tibre? Who burned Mucio's arm and hand? Who prompted Curcio to
to jump into the deep fiery chasm that appeared in the middle of Rome?
Who, against all the omens that had been shown against him, made
pass the Rubicon to Caesar? And, using more modern examples, who drilled the
ships and left the brave Spaniards guided by the
Most courteous courteous in the New World? All these and other great and
different feats are, were and will be works of fame, that mortals
wish as prizes and part of immortality that their famous deeds
deserve, since Christians, Catholics and errant knights more
we must attend to the glory of the centuries to come, which is eternal in
the ethereal and celestial regions, than to the vanity of fame that in this
present and ending century is reached; which fame, however long it lasts, in
The end has to end the same world, which has its appointed end. So oh
Sancho !, that our works must not go beyond the limit that has set us
the Christian religion, which we profess. We have to kill the giants
pride; to envy, in generosity and good chest; to anger, in the
calm restraint and stillness of mind; to gluttony and sleep, in the little
eat what we eat and in the much vigilance that we watch; to lust and lust,
in the loyalty we keep to those we have made ladies of our
thoughts; to laziness, with walking all over the world,
looking for the occasions that they can make us and do, about Christians,
famous gentlemen. You see here, Sancho, the means by which the
let us be of praise that I bring the good fame with it.
`` Everything that your grace has told me up to now, '' said Sancho, `` I have
understood very well, but, with all that, I would like your grace to me
sip a doubt that now has come to my memory at this point.
"Asolviese you mean, Sancho," said Don Quixote. Say in good time, that
I will answer what you know.
"Tell me, sir," Sancho continued, "those Julios or Agostos, and all those
accomplished gentlemen who have said, who are already dead, where are they now?
"The Gentiles," replied Don Quixote, "are undoubtedly in hell; the
Christians, if they were good Christians, or are they in purgatory or in the
heaven.
"Okay," said Sancho, "but let's know now: those graves where they are
the bodies of the arms, do they have silver lamps in front of them, or
the walls of their chapels are adorned with crutches, shrouds,
Wax hair, legs and eyes? And if not, what are they
adorned?
To which Don Quixote replied:
-The tombs of the Gentiles were for the most part sumptuous temples:
The ashes of Julius Caesar's body were placed on a pyramid of
stone of inordinate grandeur, which today in Rome is called The Needle of Saint
Pedro; Emperor Hadrian was buried by such a large castle
like a good village, whom they called Moles Hadriani, who is now the
castle of Santángel in Rome; Queen Artemis buried her husband
Mausoleum in a tomb that was considered one of the seven wonders of the
world; but none of these graves nor many others that had the
Gentiles adorned themselves with shrouds or other offerings and signs that
Let those who were buried in them show themselves to be holy.
"That's what I'm going to do," Sancho replied. And tell me now: which is more: to resurrect a
dead, or kill a giant?
`` The answer is in the hand, '' replied Don Quixote, `` it is more to resurrect
a dead.
`` I have got hold of him, '' said Sancho, `` then the fame of the one who raises the dead, gives
sight the blind, straighten the lame and give health to the sick, and before
lamps burn from their graves, and their chapels are full of people
devotees who on their knees worship his relics, the better fame will be, for this and
for the next century, than the one left and how many emperors
gentlemen and knights errant there have been in the world.
"I also confess that truth," answered Don Quixote.
-Well, this fame, these thanks, these prerogatives, as they call this
answered Sancho, they have the bodies and relics of the saints who,
with the approval and license of our holy mother Church, they have lamps,
candles, shrouds, crutches, paintings, hair, eyes, legs, with which
they increase devotion and magnify his Christian fame. The bodies of the
saints or their relics carry the kings on their shoulders, kiss the
pieces of his bones, adorn and enrich with them his oratorios and his
most precious altars ...
"What do you want me to infer, Sancho, from everything you have said?" -said don
Quixote.
`` I mean, '' said Sancho, `` that we become saints, and we will achieve more
briefly the good reputation that we claim; and notice, sir, that yesterday or
the day before yesterday, who, according to little can be said in this way, canonized
or beatified two barefoot friars, whose iron chains with which
they girded and tormented their bodies it is now very fortunate to kiss them
and touch them, and they are in more veneration than is, as I said, the sword of
Roldan in the armory of the king, our lord, may God save. So,
My lord, it is better to be a humble little friar, of whatever order,
what a brave and errant knight; but with God two dozen
disciplines that two thousand launched, now give them to giants, now to vestiges or
endrigos.
`` This is all so, '' answered Don Quixote, `` but not all of us can be
friars, and there are many ways by which God leads his own to the
heaven: religion is chivalry; holy knights are in glory.
"Yes," answered Sancho, "but I have heard that there are more friars in the
heaven what knights errant.
`` That is, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because the number of religious is greater.
than that of the knights.
"Many are the erring," said Sancho.
`` Many, '' replied Don Quixote, `` but few who deserve the name of
gentlemen.
In these and other similar talks that night and day passed
next, without happening to them anything to tell, that not a little
weighed don Quixote. Anyway, another day, at dusk, they discovered the great
city ​​of Toboso, with whose sight the spirits rejoiced Don
Quixote and Sancho were saddened because he did not know the house of
Dulcinea had never seen her in her life, as her lord had not seen her; from
so that the one for seeing her, and the other for not having seen her, were
rowdy, and Sancho could not imagine what he would do when his owner
sent to Toboso. Finally, Don Quixote ordered to enter the city
late at night, and as the hour drew near, they stood between
some holm oaks that were near the Toboso, and, having reached the certain point,
They entered the city, where things happened to them that come to things.
Chapter IX. Where it is told what will be seen in it
It was midnight by edge, little more or less, when Don Quixote and Sancho
They left the mountain and entered Toboso. The town was in a calm
silence, because all his neighbors slept and rested with their legs stretched out,
as they say. It was the dark night, since Sancho wanted him to
out of all darkness, to find in its darkness an excuse for its folly. No
the whole place could be heard but the barking of dogs, which thundered the ears of
Don Quixote and disturbed Sancho's heart. From time to time I brayed
a donkey, pigs growled, cats maya, whose voices, of different
sounds, increased with the silence of the night, all of which had the
enamored gentleman to bad omen; but, with all this, he said to Sancho:
-Sancho, son, guide to Dulcinea's palace: perhaps we may find her
wake up.
`` To which palace do I have to guide, body of the sun, '' answered Sancho, `` that in
The one that I saw in his greatness was not but a very small house?
`` It must have been retired, then, '' answered Don Quixote, `` somewhere
little seclusion from his fortress, basking alone with his maids,
as is the use and custom of high ladies and princesses.
`` Sir, '' said Sancho, `` since your grace wants, in spite of me, that it be
Alcazar the house of my lady Dulcinea, is this time by chance to find
The open door? And will it be good that we knock so that they hear us and we
open up, making all the people into an uproar and rumor? Are we going to
call the house of our young women, as do the rogues, that
They arrive, and they call, and they enter at any time, no matter how late it is?
"Let us first find the fortress one by one," replied Don Quixote, "which
Then I will tell you, Sancho, what will be good for us to do. And warns,
Sancho, that I see little, or that that big and shadowy lump that from here
the must to do the palace of Dulcinea is discovered.
"Then guide your grace," replied Sancho, "perhaps it will be so;" although I
I will see with my eyes and I will touch it with my hands, and so I will believe it as I believe
that it is now daytime.
Don Quixote led, and, having walked about two hundred paces, he found the bundle
making the shadow, and he saw a great tower, and then he knew that this
The building was not a fortress, but the main church of the town. And said:
-We have found the church, Sancho.
"I see it," answered Sancho; and pray to God that we do not give our
burial, that it is not a good sign to walk on the foundations at such hours, and
more, having said at your mercy, if I remember correctly, that the
This lady's house must be in a cul-de-sac.
-Damn you of God, fool! said Don Quixote. Where have you
found that the royal fortresses and palaces are built in alleys
No Exit?
`` Sir, '' answered Sancho, `` in each land its use: perhaps it is used here in the
Toboso build palaces and large buildings in alleys; and so,
I beg your mercy to let me search these streets or alleys that
offered to me: it could be that in some corner I came across that fortress, that
I saw him eaten by dogs, which thus brings us bulls and strains.
`` Speak respectfully, Sancho, about my lady's things, '' said Don Quixote, `` and
let's have the party in peace, and let's not throw the rope after the cauldron.
"I'll report back," answered Sancho; but with what patience can I bear
May your grace want that only once I saw the house of our
loves, I must always know it and find it at midnight, not finding it
Your grace, who must have seen it thousands of times?
"You will make me despair, Sancho," said Don Quixote. Come here, heretic: don't you
I have said a thousand times that in all the days of my life I have not seen the sin
to Dulcinea, nor did I ever cross the threshold of her palace, and that only
I am in love with hearsay and with the great reputation it has for being beautiful and discreet?
"Now I hear it," answered Sancho; and I say that, because your grace has not
seen, nor have I ...
"That cannot be," replied Don Quixote; that, at least, you've already told me
you who saw her making wheat, when you brought me the answer of the
letter that I sent with you.
`` Don't stick to that, sir, '' answered Sancho, `` because I am letting you know that
The hearing and the answer that I brought to him was also hearsay; because so i know
I who is Mrs. Dulcinea like giving a fist in heaven.
`` Sancho, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` there are times to mock, and times
where teasing falls and seems bad. Not because I say that I have neither seen nor
spoken to the lady of my soul, have you also said that you have not
spoken nor seen, being as backwards as you know.
While the two of them were in these talks, they saw that he was coming to pass by where
they were one with two mules, which, because of the noise made by the plow, which
dragged along the ground, they judged that he must be a farmer,
early morning before day to go to his farm; and so was the truth. Came the
labrador singing that romance that they say:
Bad you had it, French,
in that of Roncesvalles.
`` Let them kill me, Sancho, '' Don Quixote said, hearing him,
good thing happen tonight. Can not you hear what that thug is singing?
"Yes, I hear," answered Sancho; But what does hunting for
Roncesvalles? So I could sing the romance of Calaínos, that all were one
to happen to us good or bad in our business.
At this the farmer arrived, whom Don Quixote asked:
"Can you tell me, good friend, what good fortune may God give you? Where are they from?"
here the palaces of the unique princess doña Dulcinea del Toboso?
`` Sir, '' replied the waiter, `` I am a stranger and I have only been in
this town, serving a rich farmer in the cultivation of the field; in that
frontier house live the priest and the sacristan of the place; between them, or
any one of them, will know how to give your mercy reason for lady princess,
because they have the list of all the residents of Toboso; although for me
I have that in everything he does not live any princess; many ladies, yes,
main ones, that each one in her house can be a princess.
`` Well, among those, '' said Don Quixote, `` there must be, friend, this one for whom you
I ask.
"Could be," replied the waiter. and goodbye, the dawn is coming.
And, giving his mules, he answered no further questions. Sancho, who saw suspense
to his lord and quite unhappy, he said:
-Sir, the day is coming, and it will not be wise to let us
find the sun in the street; we better get out of town, and
May your grace be ambushed in some forest near here, and I
I will return during the day, and I will not leave you in all this place where I do not seek
house, fortress or palace of my lady, and asaz would be unfortunate if I did not
found; and, finding him, I will speak with his mercy, and tell him where and how it remains
your grace waiting for you to give order and plan to see it, without prejudice
of his honor and fame.
`` You have said, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` a thousand sentences enclosed in the
circle of brief words: the advice that you have now given me I fancy and
receipt of very nice wins. Come, son, and let's find where I ambush, what
you will return, as you say, to look for, to see and to speak to my lady, of whose
discretion and courtesy I expect more than miraculous favors.
Sancho was enraged to remove his master from the town, because he did not find out the
lie about the answer that Dulcinea had brought to Sierra
Brunette; and so he hurried to the exit, which was later, and two miles from the
place they found a forest or forest, where Don Quixote ambushed while
that Sancho was returning to the city to speak to Dulcinea; in whose embassy you
things happened that call for new attention and new credit.
Chapter X. Where the industry that Sancho had to enchant the
Mrs. Dulcinea, and other events as ridiculous as true
Arriving the author of this great story to tell what in this chapter
account, says that he wanted to pass him in silence, fearful that there was no
be believed, because Don Quixote's follies came to an end here and
line of the majors that can be imagined, and even two shots of
crossbow beyond the majors. Finally, although with this fear and
suspiciously, he wrote them in the same way he did, without adding
take from history an atom of truth, without giving it anything for the
objections that could make him a liar. And he was right, because the truth
slims and does not bankrupt, and always walks on the lie like oil on
Water.
And so, continuing his story, he says that, just as Don Quixote ambushed
in the forest, holm oak or jungle next to the great Toboso, he ordered Sancho to return
to the city, and that he did not return to his presence without having first spoken of
her part to her mistress, asking her to be served to be seen by her captive
gentleman, and deign to bestow upon him his blessing, so that he might wait
for her very happy events of all her endeavors and difficult
Business. Sancho was in charge of doing it as he was commanded, and of bringing him
as good an answer as I brought you the first time.
`` Come on, son, '' replied Don Quixote, `` and don't be disturbed when you see yourself before the
sunlight of beauty that you are going to look for. Blessed are you above all
squires of the world! Have memory, and do not miss how he receives you: yes
change the colors the time you are giving it my embassy; whether
disquiet and disturb hearing my name; if it doesn't fit on the pillow, if at all
You find her seated on the rich dais of her authority; and if he is standing,
look at her if she stands now on the one, now on the other foot; if he repeats you
the answer that he gives you two or three times; if the change from soft to rough,
from aceda to loving; if he raises his hand to his hair to compose it, although
don't be messy; finally, son, look at all your actions and
movements; because if you tell me how they were, I'll get it
that she has hidden in the secret of her heart about what at
date of my love touches; What do you have to know, Sancho, if you don't know, what
Between lovers, the outer actions and movements they show,
When it comes to their loves, they are very accurate emails that bring the new
of what happens inside the soul. Go, friend, and guide yourself to a better one
luck than mine, and become another better event than I am left fearing
and waiting in this bitter loneliness where you leave me.
"I will go and return quickly," said Sancho; and expand your mercy, sir
mine, that little heart, which must now have no greater than a
hazelnut, and consider that it is often said that a good heart breaks bad
good fortune, and that where there are no bacon, there are no stakes; and it is also said:
where he does not think, the hare jumps. Say it because if tonight we don't find
the palaces or fortresses of my lady, now that it is daytime I think
find, when you least think about it, and found, leave me with her.
"By the way, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "you always bring your sayings so
at the hair of what we are dealing with as much as God gives me better luck in what I desire.
This being said, Sancho turned his back and shook his white, and Don Quixote
He remained on horseback, resting on the stirrups and on the harness of his
spear, full of sad and confused imaginations, where we will leave you,
leaving with Sancho Panza, who no less confused and thoughtful turned away from his
sir that he was; and so much, that, barely had left the forest, when,
turning his head and seeing that Don Quixote did not seem, he got out of the
donkey, and, sitting at the foot of a tree, began to talk to himself and
to say:
-Let's know now, Sancho brother, where your grace is going. Are you going to look for some
donkey that you have lost? "No, by the way." Well, what are you going to look for?
'' I am going to look, like someone who says nothing, a princess, and in her the sun
of beauty and all of heaven together. '' And where do you think to find that
you say, Sancho? ''Where to? In the great city of Toboso. '' Well: what about
whose part are you going to look for? '' From the famous gentleman don
Quixote de la Mancha, who disfaces the one-eyed, and feeds the thirsty,
and drink to the hungry. '' This is all very good. And do you know his house,
Sancho? `` My master says that they must be royal palaces or magnificent
Alcazares ''. And have you ever seen her by any chance? '' Neither I nor my master
we have ever seen. '' And what if it was successful and well done?
those of Toboso knew that you are here with the intention of going to
elicit their princesses and disturb their ladies, come and you
grind the ribs into pure sticks, and leave you no healthy bone? ''On
It is true that they would be very right, when they did not consider that I am commanded, and
What a messenger you are, friend, you do not deserve guilt, non. '' Don't trust that
Sancho, because the people of La Mancha are as angry as they are honest, and
consent to tickling anyone. Long live God, if it smells to you, I send you bad
fortune. '' Oxte, you fucking! There you will give, lightning! No, but let me go looking for
three feet to the cat for the taste of others! And more, that this is how it will be to look for Dulcinea
for the Toboso as Marica for Ravenna, or the bachelor in Salamanca. The
Devil, the devil has gotten me into this, that someone else has not! ''
This soliloquy passed with Sancho, and what he got out of it was that he returned to
say:
-Now, all things have a remedy, if it is not death, under
whose yoke we all have to go through, no matter how bad it is, at the end of life.
This my master, for a thousand signs, I have seen that he is a madman to tie, and even
I also do not lag behind, because I am more foolish than him, because I follow
and I serve you, if the saying is true that says: "Tell me who you are with,
tell you who you are ", and the other of" Not with whom you are born, but with whom
peace. "Being, then, crazy, as it is, and of madness that most times takes
some things by others, and judge white by black and black by white,
as it seemed when he said that the windmills were gigantic, and the
mules of religious dromedaries, and herds of rams armies of
enemies, and many other things of this kind, it will not be very difficult to
to believe that a female farmer, the first one that I will come across here, is the lady
Dulcinea; and, when he does not believe it, I will swear; and if he swears, I will return to
swear; and if I persist, I will persist more, and in a way that I have to have the
always mine on the milestone, come what may. Maybe with this stubbornness
I will finish him off that he does not send me such messages again, seeing
how bad a message I bring you from them, or maybe you will think, as I imagine, that
some charming evil of these that he says they want him badly there will be
changed the figure for hurting him and hurting him.
With this that Sancho Panza thought his spirit was calmed, and he considered
finishing his business, and stopping there until the afternoon, to result in
Don Quixote thought that he had had him to go and return from Toboso; and
everything happened to him so well that, when he got up to climb on the gray, he saw
that from Toboso to where he was coming three farm workers out of three
chicks, or colts, which the author does not declare, although more can be believed
that they were donkeys, being ordinary cavalry of the villagers; but how
it does not go much in this, there is no reason to stop to find out. On
resolution: just as Sancho saw the peasant women, he returned to
look for his lord Don Quixote, and found him sighing and saying a thousand amorous
wailing. As Don Quixote saw him, he said:
-What's up, friend Sancho? Can I mark this day with a white stone, or with
black?
`` It would be better, '' answered Sancho, `` that your grace points out to him with red blood, as
Chair certificates, because those who see him look good on him.
"In this way," replied Don Quixote, "you bring good news."
`` So good, '' answered Sancho, `` that he only has to do your mercy.
but to bite Rocinante and go out in the open to see Mrs. Dulcinea from the
Toboso, who with two other maids of his comes to see your mercy.
-Holy God! What do you say, Sancho friend? said Don Quixote. Sight
do not deceive me, nor do you want with false joys to brighten up my true ones
sadness
"What would I get out of deceiving your grace," replied Sancho, "and more
being so close to discovering my truth? Chop, sir, and come, and you will see
come to the princess, our mistress, dressed and adorned, in short, like who
she is. Her maidens and she are all a golden ember, all ears of
pearls, all diamonds, all rubies, all brocade fabrics of more than
high ten; the hair, loose at the back, which is as many
rays of the sun that are playing with the wind; and, above all, they come to
horse on three mended Canaanites, there is nothing more to see.
-Hacaneas you mean, Sancho.
"There is little difference," answered Sancho, "from Cananeas to Hacaneas;" but,
Come on what they come, they come the most handsome ladies that are
may wish, especially Princess Dulcinea, my lady, who astonishes the
senses.
"Come on, Sancho junior," answered Don Quixote; and, in albricias destas no
expected as good news, I send you the best spoil that I will win in the
first adventure I have, and if this does not satisfy you, I will send you the babies
that this year they give me my three mares, which you know are left for
give birth in the council meadow of our town.
`` I stick to the young, '' answered Sancho, `` because if they are good
spoils of the first adventure is not quite true.
At this point they left the jungle, and discovered the three villagers nearby.
Don Quixote spread his eyes all the way to Toboso, and since he did not see
but to the three laborers, everything was disturbed, and he asked Sancho if he had
left out of town.
-How out of town? -answered-. Does your mercy have the
eyes in the colodrillo, that I do not see that they are these, the ones that come here,
resplendent like the same sun at noon?
`` I don't see, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` but three farm workers out of three.
borricos.
-God save me from the devil! Sancho answered. And is it possible that
three hacaneas, or as they are called, white as the snow field,
look like donkeys at your mercy? Long live the Lord, may I peel off these beards
if that were true!
`` Well, I tell you, Sancho my friend, '' said Don Quixote, `` that it is so true that
They are donkeys, or donkeys, like I am Don Quixote and you are Sancho Panza; to what
less, they seem such to me.
`` Street, sir, '' said Sancho, `` don't say that word, but wake up those
eyes, and come to bow to the lady of your thoughts, who already
comes close.
And, saying this, he went ahead to receive the three villagers; and, getting off
of the rooster, had the halter of the donkey of one of the three labradors, and,
with both knees on the ground, he said:
-Queen and princess and duchess of beauty, may your haughtiness and greatness be
served to receive in his grace and good talent the captive knight
yours, that there is made stone marble, all disturbed and without pulses of
see yourself before your magnificent presence. I am Sancho Panza, your squire, and
he is the upright gentleman Don Quixote de la Mancha, called by another
name the Knight of the Sad Figure.
At this time, Don Quixote had already stood beside Sancho, and
He looked with wild eyes and troubled eyes at what Sancho called queen
and madam, and, as he discovered in her only a village girl, and not very
good face, because it was round and flat, it was suspended and admired,
without daring to unfold the lips. The women farmers were also astonished,
seeing those two men so different kneeling, that no
they let their companion pass; but, breaking the silence the
arrested, all unfortunate and pouty, she said:
-Get out of the way, nora, and let us pass, that we are in a hurry.
To which Sancho replied:
-O princess and universal lady of Toboso! How your magnanimous
heart does not soften seeing kneeling before your sublimated presence
to the coluna and sustenance of the errant cavalry?
Hearing which, another of the two said:
-Mas, ho, I shake you, donkey of my father-in-law! Look what the
gentlemen now to make fun of the villagers, as if here we did not know
taunt like them! Go your way, and let us do ours, and
being them has healed.
`` Get up, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote at this point, `` I can see that the
Fortuna, of my bad not fed up, has taken the roads all where
may some contentment come to this petty soul that I have in my flesh. AND
you, oh extreme of worth that can be desired, term of the human
Gentleness, the only remedy for this afflicted heart that adores you!
evil enchantress haunts me, and has put clouds and cataracts in my eyes,
and for only them and not for others has changed and transformed your without equal
beauty and face in that of a poor peasant, if mine also does not
has changed into that of some vestige, to make it abhorrent in your eyes,
do not stop looking at me softly and lovingly, staring at this submission
and kneeling that I do to your distorted beauty, the humility with which
my soul adores you.
-Take that my water! the villager replied. Little friend is me to hear
cracks! Stand back and let us go, and we have to thank you.
Sancho turned away and let her go, very happy to have come out of his
tangle.
The villager who had made Dulcinea's figure was scarcely freed,
when, stinging his Canaanite with a stinger that he carried on a stick, he struck
run through the meadow ahead. And, as the donkey felt the tip of the
thorn, which tired him more than usual, began to buckle,
the way he found Mrs. Dulcinea on land; which seen by don
Quixote, went to lift it, and Sancho to compose and girdle the pack, which
it also came to the belly of the colt. So the packet is settled, and
wanting Don Quixote to lift his enchanted mistress in his arms over the
jumenta, the lady, getting up from the ground, took him out of that job,
because, going back a bit, he took a run, and, wearing both
hands on the haunches of the colt, he found her body, lighter than a
hawk, on the pack, and straddled, as if it were a man; and
then Sancho said:
-Live Roque, who is the lady our mistress lighter than an acotán, and who
He can teach the most skilled Cordoba or Mexican to climb the rider! The
the saddle's rear saddle leaped past, and without spurs makes the
it spreads like a zebra. And his maidens are not behind him; that they all run
like the wind.
And that was the truth, because, when Dulcinea saw herself on horseback, they all bit
after her and they shot to run, without turning their heads back for a space of
more than half a league. Don Quixote followed them with his eyes, and when he saw that
They did not seem, turning to Sancho, he said:
-Sancho, what do you think how bad I am of charmers? And look up
Where does their malice and the anger that they have me, because they have
I wanted to deprive the content that my lady could give me to see in her being. On
Indeed, I was born as an example of the unfortunate, and to be white and earthy
where the arrows of misfortune take their sights and strike. And you have
also to warn, Sancho, that these traitors were not content to have
turned and transformed my Dulcinea, but they transformed her and returned
in a figure so low and ugly as that of that villager, and together
they took away what is so hers of the leading ladies, which is the good
smell, for always walking among amber and among flowers. Because I let you know
Sancho, that when I got to climb Dulcinea on his hacanea, according to you
you say, it looked like a donkey to me, it gave me a smell of raw garlic, that
pranced and haunted the soul.
-Oh bastard! cried Sancho at this time, `` O enchanting and unfortunate
malicious, and who saw you all skewered by the guts, like
sardines in lercha! Much you know, much you can and much more you do. Enough
I should, rascals, have changed the pearls of my mistress's eyes into
cork oak gills, and their hair of pure gold in bristles of tail of
red ox, and, finally, all its factions from good to bad, without
you will touch him in the smell; that for him we even take out what was
concealed under that ugly bark; although, to tell the truth, never
I saw his ugliness, but his beauty, to which a point and carat rose
mole that he had on his right lip, like a mustache, with seven or
eight blond hairs like strands of gold and long more than a foot.
"That mole," said Don Quixote, "according to the correspondence they have between
if those of the face with those of the body, he must have another Dulcinea on the table
of the thigh that corresponds to the side where the face is, but very
Lengths for moles are hairs of the greatness that you have stood for.
-Well, I know how to tell your mercy -answered Sancho- that they seemed to him there
as born.
`` I believe it, my friend, '' replied Don Quixote, `` because nothing put the
nature in Dulcinea that was not perfect and well finished; and so, yes
had a hundred moles like the one you say, in it they were not moles, but
shining moons and stars. But tell me, Sancho: the one that
It looked like a packet, which you dressed, was it a flat chair or an armchair?
`` It was not, '' answered Sancho, `` but a saddle for the genet, with a cover of
a field worth half a kingdom, depending on how rich it is.
"And that I didn't see all that, Sancho!" said Don Quixote. Now around
to say, and I will say a thousand times, that I am the most wretched of men.
I had had enough of Sancho's sneer to hide his laughter, hearing
the nonsense of his master, so delicately deceived. Finally after
many other reasons that passed between the two, rose again in their
beasts, and they followed the road to Zaragoza, where they thought they would arrive in time
that they could be in some solenes parties that in that famous city
every year they are usually done. But, before they got there, they happened
things that, however great and new, deserve to be written and read,
as will be seen later.
Chapter XI. Of the strange adventure that befell the brave Don Quixote
with the car, or cart, of the Cortes de la Muerte
Don Quixote was also thoughtful on his way forward, considering the
bad mockery that the enchanters had made him, returning to his mistress
Dulcinea in the bad figure of the villager, and did not imagine what remedy
he would have to return her to her first being; and these thoughts led him
so out of his mind that, without feeling it, he released the reins to Rocinante, who,
feeling the freedom that was given to him, at every step he stopped to graze the
green grass of which those fields abounded. From his rapture he
Sancho Panza returned, saying:
-Lord, sorrows were not made for the beasts, but for the
mens; but if men feel them too much, they become beasts:
your grace report, and come to your senses, and take the reins from Rocinante,
and liven up and wake up, and show that gallantry that they should have
the knights errant. What the hell is this? What decay is this?
Are we here, or in France? But let Satan take how many Dulcineas
there is in the world, for the health of a single knight-errant is worth more than
all the charms and transformations of the earth.
"Hush, Sancho," answered Don Quixote in a voice not very faint; shut up,
I say, and do not say blasphemies against that enchanted lady, who of her
misfortune and misfortune I only have the fault: of the invidia that they have to me
the bad ones their bad wandering has been born.
-I say so, -answered Sancho-: who saw it and sees it now, what is it?
the heart that does not cry?
"You may well say that, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "because you saw her in
the complete integrity of her beauty, that the charm did not extend to disturb you
your sight or conceal its beauty from you: against me alone and against my eyes it
straightens the force of its venom. But with all this, I have fallen, Sancho, in
one thing, and that is that you painted her beauty badly, because, if not badly
Okay, you said she had pearl eyes, and eyes that look like
pearls are rather bream than lady; and, to what I believe, those of
Dulcinea should be emerald green, ragged, with two heavenly
arches that serve as eyebrows; and those pearls remove them from the eyes and pass them
to the teeth, which you undoubtedly exchanged, Sancho, taking your eyes for the
teeth.
`` Anything can be, '' answered Sancho, `` because I was also disturbed by his
beauty like your ugliness. But let us entrust everything to God,
that He is the Knower of the things that are to take place in this valley of
tears, in this bad world that we have, where there is hardly anything that
be without a mixture of evil, deceit and beauty. One thing weighs on me,
my lord, more than others; What is it like to think what means to have when
your mercy vanquish some giant or other knight, and order him to leave
to present to the beauty of Senora Dulcinea: where is she to be
find this poor giant, or this poor wretched knight defeated?
It seems to me that I see them walking through the Toboso made some bausanes, looking for
my lady Dulcinea, and even if they find her in the middle of the street,
they will know more than my father.
`` Perhaps, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` the enchantment will not be extended to
take away the knowledge of Dulcinea from the defeated and presented giants and
gentlemen; and, in one or two of the first that I defeat and send him,
We will do the experience if they see it or not, sending them to give me
relation of what about this has happened to them.
`` I say, sir, '' replied Sancho, `` that I have liked what your favor
has said, and that with that artifice we will come to know what
we wish; and if it is that she only covers up your mercy, the most disgraceful
It will be of your mercy that hers; but, since Mrs. Dulcinea is healthy and
happy, we will settle here and have the best time
we can, looking for our adventures and leaving time to do the
his, that he is the best doctor of these and other major diseases.
Don Quixote wanted to respond to Sancho Panza, but a cart was in the way
that came out across the road, laden with the most diverse and strange
characters and figures that they could imagine. The one who led the mules and
he was a cart driver, he was an ugly demon. The uncovered wagon came to the
open sky, without awning or wattle. The first figure that was offered to
Don Quixote's eyes were those of Death herself, with a human face; next to
she was coming an angel with large painted wings; to one side was a
emperor with a crown, apparently of gold, on his head; at the foot of the
Death was the god they call Cupid, without a blindfold, but with his
bow, quiver and arrows. There was also a gentleman armed with the tip of the
white, except that he had no morion, no hat, but a hat full of
feathers of various colors; with these came other people from different
suits and faces. All of which seen on the spur of the moment, somehow
he excited Don Quixote and put fear in Sancho's heart; more then I know
Don Quixote delighted, believing that he was being offered some new and dangerous
adventure, and with this thought, and with a willingness to undertake
any danger, he stepped in front of the wagon, and, with a loud and
threatening, said:
-Road driver, coachman, or devil, or what you are, don't delay in telling me who
you are, where are you going and who are the people that you carry in your carriage, what else
It looks like the boat of Carón that wagon of the ones that are used.
To which, meekly, stopping the cart, the Devil replied:
-Sir, we are recitors of the company of Angulo el Malo; we have
made in a place that is behind that hill, this morning, which is the
octava del Corpus, the order of the Cortes de la Muerte, and let's
this afternoon in that place that looks like it from here; and, for being so close
and excuse the work of undressing and getting dressed again, we go
dressed in the same dresses we represent. That young man goes from
Death; the other, from Ángel; that woman, who is the author's, is Queen;
the other, of Soldier; that, of Emperor, and I, of Demon, and I am one of
the main figures of the car, because in this company I make the first
papers. If something else your grace wishes to know about us, ask me,
that I will know how to respond with all punctuality; that, since I am a demon, everything
it reaches me.
`` By the faith of a knight-errant, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that, just as I saw
this car, I imagined that some great adventure was offered to me; and now i say
that it is necessary to touch the appearances with the hand to give rise to the
disillusion. Walk with God, good people, and make your party, and see if
you send something that may be of benefit to you, which I will do with good spirit and
good mood, because since I was a boy I was fond of the cover, and in my
youth my eyes went after the show.
Being in these talks, luckily one of the company arrived,
who was dressed in bojiganga, with many bells, and at the top of a
palo had three swollen cow bladders; which moharracho, arriving at
Don Quixote, began to wield the stick and shake the ground with his
bladders, already leaping, ringing bells, whose poor vision
thus he stirred up Rocinante, who, without being able to stop him from Don Quixote,
taking the bridle between his teeth, he ran across the field with more
lightness that the bones of his notomy never promised. Sancho, what
He considered the danger his master was in if he was knocked down, he jumped from the rocket,
and in a hurry he went to serve him; but, when he arrived, he was already in
earth, and next to him, Rocinante, who, with his master, came to the ground: ordinary
end and whereabouts of Rocinante's blossoms and their daring.
But as soon as Sancho had left his cavalry to go to Don Quixote,
when the dancing demon with the bladders jumped on the dart, and,
shaking him with them, fear and noise, more than the pain of the blows,
He made him fly through the campaign to the place where they were going to have the party.
Sancho watched the career of his black and the fall of his master, and did not know
which of the two needs would go first; but, indeed, as good
squire and as a good servant, the love of his master was stronger than the
affection of his donkey, since every time he saw the bladders lift in
the air and falling on the haunches of his red deer were for him spurs and scares
death, and first he would like those blows to be dealt to him in the
girls of the eyes that in the slightest hair of the tail of your ass. With this
perplexed tribulation arrived where Don Quixote was, much more battered than
whatever he wanted, and, helping him to climb on Rocinante, he said:
-Sir, the Devil has taken the rookie.
-What a devil? asked Don Quixote.
"The one with the bladders," answered Sancho.
"Well, I'll charge you," replied Don Quixote, "even if you shut yourself up with him in
the deepest and darkest dungeons of hell. Follow me, Sancho, that the
The cart goes slowly, and with the mules I will make up for the loss of the rook.
"There is no need to do this errand, sir," answered Sancho.
mercy temper his anger, which, it seems to me, the Devil has already left the
rucio, and returns to love.
And so was the truth; because, the Devil having fallen with the rodent, for
imitate Don Quixote and Rocinante, the Devil went on foot to town, and the
donkey turned to his master.
`` With all that, '' said Don Quixote, `` it will be good to punish the
that demon in one of those on the cart, even if it is the same
emperor.
`` Take away that of your imagination at your mercy, '' replied Sancho, `` and take
my advice, which is never to be taken with phonies, which are people
favored. Reciter I have seen myself being imprisoned for two deaths and leaving
free and without costs. May your mercy know that, as they are happy and
pleasure, all favor them, all support, help and esteem them, and more
being of those of the royal and title companies, that all, or the
more, in their clothes and composure they look like princes.
`` Well, with everything, '' answered Don Quixote, `` the devil is not going to leave me.
phony praising, although the whole human race favors him.
And, saying this, he returned to the cart, which was already very close to the town.
He was shouting, saying:
-Stop, wait, joyful and rejoicing mob, I want to make you understand
how to treat the donkeys and vermin that serve as cavalry to
the squires of the knights errant.
So loud were Don Quixote's cries that they heard and understood the
of the cart; and, judging by the words the intention of the one who said them,
in an instant Death leapt from the cart, and behind her, the Emperor, the
Devil carter and the Angel, without remaining the Queen or the god Cupid; and
They all loaded themselves with stones and got on the wing, waiting to receive Don
Quixote on the tips of its pebbles. Don Quixote, who saw them put on
such a gallant squad, arms raised with the gesture of saying goodbye
the stones powerfully, stopped Rocinante's reins and began to think
how he would attack them with less danger from himself. In this that I know
stopped, Sancho arrived, and, seeing him fit to attack the well-formed
squad, he said:
It would be madness to attempt such an undertaking: consider your mercy, sir.
mine, that for brook soup and tente bonnet, there is no defensive weapon in the
world, if it is not stuffing oneself and enclosing oneself in a bronze bell; and also
It must be considered that it is more reckless than bravery to undertake a man
only to an army where Death is, and emperors fight in person, and
whom good and bad angels help; and if this consideration does not
moves him to stay, move him to know for sure that, among all those who
there they are, although they look like kings, princes and emperors, there is no
errant knight.
`` Now yes, '' said Don Quixote, `` you have hit, Sancho, where you can and should
move from my already determined attempt. I cannot and should not draw the sword,
as many other times I have told you, against whom I will not be armed
gentleman. To you, Sancho, touch, if you want to take revenge for the wrong that
it has been done to your rucio, that from here I will help you with voices and
healthy warnings.
`` There is no reason, sir, '' answered Sancho, `` to take revenge on anyone, because
it is not good Christians to take it from grievances; how much more, than me
I will destroy my ass who puts his offense in the hands of my will, the
which is to live peacefully the days that the heavens give me life.
"Well, that is your determination," replied Don Quixote, "Sancho bueno, Sancho
discreet, Christian Sancho and sincere Sancho, let's leave these ghosts and
Let's go back to looking for better and more qualified adventures; that I see this
earth of size, which must not be lacking in many and very miraculous.
He returned the reins later, Sancho went to take his white, Death with all
his flying squad returned to their wagon and continued their journey, and this
happy end had the fearful adventure of the wagon of death, thank you
be given to the salutary advice that Sancho Panza gave his master; to which, the
next day, another happened to him with a loving and errant gentleman, otherwise
less suspension than last.
Chapter XII. Of the strange adventure that happened to the brave gift
Quixote with the brave Knight of Mirrors
The night that followed the day of the encounter of Death was spent by don
Quixote and his squire under some tall and shady trees, having,
persuasion of Sancho, Don Quixote eaten of what came in the spare part of the
Rucio, and between supper Sancho said to his master:
-Sir, what a fool would I have and I would have been if I had chosen
spoils of the first adventure that your grace ended, before the
young of the three mares! Indeed, indeed, bird in hand is better than
vulture flying.
`` Still, '' replied Don Quixote, `` if you, Sancho, would let me attack, as
I wanted, they would have fit you in spoils, at least, the golden crown
of the Empress and the painted wings of Cupid, that I took them off
redrope it and put them in your hands.
"Never the scepters and crowns of phony emperors," he replied.
Sancho Panza- they were of pure gold, but of tinsel or tin leaf.
`` That is true, '' replied Don Quixote, `` because it was not correct that the
comedy trappings were fine, but feigned and apparent, as is
the same comedy, with which I want, Sancho, that you are well, having it in
your grace, and consequently to those who represent them and
that compose them, because they are all instruments of doing great good to the
republic, putting a mirror at each step forward, where they can see themselves live
the actions of human life, and there is no comparison more to the live
represents us what we are and what we have to be like comedy and
comedians. If not, tell me: haven't you seen a comedy performed?
where kings, emperors and pontiffs, knights, ladies and
other various characters? One plays the ruffian, another the liar, this one the
merchant, one the soldier, another the simple discreet, another the lover
simple; and, after the comedy and stripping off her dresses, they
all the recitors the same.
"Yes, I have seen," answered Sancho.
`` Well, the same thing, '' said Don Quixote, `` happens in comedy and I try to
world, where some make emperors, others pontiffs, and,
finally, all how many figures can be introduced in a comedy;
but, in reaching the end, which is when life ends, it takes away from all
death the clothes that differentiated them, and they remain the same in the
grave.
- Brave comparison! -said Sancho-, although not so new that I have not
heard many and various times, like that of the game of chess, that,
while the game lasts, each piece has its own particular job; and in
with the game over, they all mix, gather and shuffle, and find them in
a bag, which is like finding life in the grave.
`` Every day, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` you are becoming less simple and more
discreet.
-Yes, something has to stick to me from the discretion of your grace
-answered Sancho-; that the lands that are themselves barren and dry,
by dunging and cultivating them, they come to bear good fruit: I mean
that the conversation of your grace has been the manure that on the
barren land of my dry wit has fallen; cultivation, the time
has I serve and communicate; and with this I hope to give fruits of me that are
of blessing, such that they do not neglect or slip from the paths of
good upbringing that your grace has done in my withered understanding.
Don Quixote laughed at Sancho's affected reasons, and it seemed to be
what he said about his emienda is true, because from time to time he talked about
way I admired him; since all or the more times that Sancho wanted
speak of opposition and courtly, his reason ended with falling off the
mount from its simplicity to the depth of its ignorance; and what he knows
showed more elegant and memorable was in bringing sayings, whether they came or not
came bare of what it was about, as it will have been seen and noticed in
the discourse of this story.
In these and other talks they spent much of the night, and Sancho
It came to him in the will to drop the floodgates of his eyes, as he said
when he wanted to sleep, and, disheveled the gray, gave him abundant grass and
free. He did not remove Rocinante's chair, as it was the express command of his
sir, as long as they were in the field, or did not sleep underneath
Roofing, Don't Scrub Rocinante - Old Fashion Established and Saved
of the errant knights, remove the bridle and hang him from the saddle of the
chair; but, remove the saddle from the horse ?, save !; and so did Sancho,
and gave him the same freedom as the rucio, whose friendship with him and Rocinante
It was so unique and so stuck, that there is fame, by tradition from father to son,
that the author of this true story made particular chapters of it;
more than, for keeping the decency and decorum that such a heroic story
must not put them in it, since sometimes it is neglected to
budget, and writes that, just as the two beasts got together, they went to
scratching each other, and that, after tired and satisfied, crossed
Rocinante the neck on the neck of the red deer (which was left over from the other
more than half a rod), and, looking attentively at the ground, they
They used to be that way for three days; at least, all the time
they left them, or hunger did not compel them to seek sustenance.
I say that they say that the author left writing that he had compared them in the
friendship to which they had Niso and Euríalo, and Pílades and Orestes; and if this is
Thus, it could be seen, to universal admiration, how firm it must have been
the friendship of these two peaceful animals, and to the confusion of men,
How badly they know how to befriend each other. This is why it was said:
There is no friend for friend:
the reeds become spears;
and the other who sang:
From friend to friend the bed bug, etc.
And it does not seem to anyone that the author went something out of the way in having
compared the friendship of these animals to that of men,
beasts have received many warnings men and learned many
things of importance, such as: storks, the cristel; of the dogs,
vomiting and gratitude; of the cranes, vigilance; of the
ants, providence; of elephants, honesty, and loyalty,
of the horse.
Finally, Sancho fell asleep at the foot of a cork oak, and Don Quixote
dozing that of a robust oak; but, little space of time had
past, when he was awakened by a noise behind him, and,
getting up with a start, he began to look and listen to where the noise
proceeded, and saw that there were two men on horseback, and that the one,
knocking down from his chair, he said to the other:
- Get down, friend, and take the brakes off the horses, which, in my opinion, this
place abounds with grass for them, and the silence and solitude that they have needed
my loving thoughts.
Saying this and lying on the ground all went at the same time; and, to
throw himself, the weapons with which he came armed made a noise, shows a
where Don Quixote learned that he must be a knight errant; and,
reaching Sancho, who was sleeping, he locked his arm, and with no small
work returned him to his agreement, and in a low voice he said:
-Brother Sancho, we have adventure.
"God give us a good one," answered Sancho; and where is, my lord, your
At the mercy of that lady adventure?
-Where, Sancho? replied Don Quixote; turn your eyes and look, and you will see
lying there a knight errant, who, to what transpires to me, does not
He must be overjoyed, because I saw him throw off his horse and
lie on the ground with some displays of spite, and when he falls he
weapons creaked.
"Well, what is your mercy," said Sancho, "that this is an adventure?"
`` I do not want to say, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that this is an adventure at all,
but the beginning of it; that the adventures begin here. But
listen, that, it seems, is tuning a lute or vigüela, and, according to
he spits and undoes his chest, he must prepare to sing something.
`` In good faith, that is so, '' answered Sancho, `` and that he must be a gentleman.
in love.
"There is none of the errant who is not," said Don Quixote. AND
Let's listen to him, that by the thread we will get the ball of his thoughts, yes
is that he sings; that out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks.
Replicate Sancho wanted his master, but the voice of the Knight of the Forest, who
my very good was not very bad, it hindered him; and, being both astonished,
they heard that what he sang was this sonnet:
-Give me, madam, a term to follow,
according to your will cut off;
that will be mine so dear,
that for ever a point of disdain.
If you like that shutting up my fatigue
die, tell me now for finished:
if you want me to tell it to you in obsolete
Anyway, I'll make love say it.
Contrary proof I am made,
of soft wax and hard diamond,
and to the laws of love the mistress adjusted.
Soft what is it, or strong, I offer my chest:
carve or print whatever you like,
that to keep it eternally I swear.
With a woe! Torn, apparently, from the depths of his heart, he ended
his song the Knight of the Forest, and, from there to a little, with a sorrowful voice and
hurt, said:
"Oh the most beautiful and the most ungrateful woman in the world!" How will it be
possible, most serene Casildea de Vandalia, that you have to consent to
consume and end in continuous pilgrimages and rough and hard work
this your captive knight? Isn't it enough since I've made you confess for
the most beautiful in the world all the knights of Navarre, all the
Leonese, all Tartessians, all Castilians, and, finally, all
the Knights of La Mancha?
`` Not that, '' said Don Quixote at this time, `` that I am from La Mancha and never
such I have confessed, neither could nor should I confess a thing so damaging to the
beauty of my lady; And this such gentleman, you see, Sancho, that
raving. But let's listen: perhaps more will be declared.
"Yes, he will," replied Sancho, "what term has been complaining for a month?
But it was not so, because, having heard the Knight of the Forest that
spoke near him, without going forward in his lamentation, he stood up, and
he said in a restrained and restrained voice:
-Who goes there? That people? Is it by chance that of the number of
content, or that of the afflicted?
"Of the afflicted," answered Don Quixote.
`` Then come to me, '' replied the one from the Forest, `` and you will realize that
to the same sadness and the same affliction.
Don Quixote, who saw himself respond so tenderly and restrained, came to
him, and Sancho neither more nor less.
The mourning knight took Don Quixote by the arm, saying:
-Sit here, sir knight, that to understand that you are, and of those who
profess the errant cavalry, it is enough for me to have found you in this place,
where solitude and serene keep you company, natural beds and your own
rooms of the knights errant.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-I am a gentleman, and of the profession that you say; and, although in my soul they have their
own seat sadness, misfortune and misfortune, not for that
the compassion I have for other people's misfortunes has been driven away. From
what you said a short time ago, I gathered that yours are in love, I want
That is to say, of the love you have for that beautiful ungrateful woman who in your
you named lamentations.
Already when this happened they were sitting together on the hard earth, in
good peace and company, as if at the break of day they had not broken
the heads.
"By chance, sir," the man from the Forest asked Don Quixote, "are you
in love?
"By misfortune I am," answered Don Quixote; although the damages that are born
of the well-placed thoughts, before they must be had by thanks that
unfortunately.
`` That is the truth, '' replied the one from the Forest, `` if reason and
understanding the disdain, which, being many, seem revenge.
"I was never scorned by my lady," answered Don Quixote.
"No, by the way," said Sancho, who was standing there, "because she is my mistress."
like a meek sheep: it is softer than butter.
"Is this your squire?" asked the one from the Forest.
"Yes, it is," answered Don Quixote.
`` I have never seen a squire, '' replied the one from the Forest, `` who dares to speak
where his lord speaks; at least, there is that mine, which is as big as
his father, and it will not be proved that he has unfolded his lip where I speak.
"Well, by faith," said Sancho, "I have spoken, and I can speak in front of another
so ... and even stay here, which is worse than meneallo.
The Forest squire seized Sancho by the arm, saying:
-Let's both go where we can talk squirely all that
we would like, and let these gentlemen of ours who give themselves of the
antlers, telling each other the stories of their loves; that surely has
to catch the day in them and they should not have finished.
"Be it in good time," said Sancho; and I will tell your mercy who I am,
So I can see if I can get in a dozen with the more speaking squires.
With this the two squires parted, between whom a so
Funny colloquy as it was serious what happened between their masters.
Chapter XIII. Where the adventure of the Knight of the Forest continues, with
the discreet, new and smooth conversation that happened between the two squires
Divided were knights and squires: these counting their lives, and
the former their loves; but the story tells first the reasoning of the
young men and then the masters continues; and thus, he says that, moving away a little
of them, the one from the Forest said to Sancho:
-Working life is what we go through and live, my lord, these that we are
squires of knights errant: indeed we eat bread in sweat
of our faces, which is one of the curses that God cast on our
first parents.
`` It can also be said, '' added Sancho, `` that we eat it in the yelo of
our bodies; because who is hotter and colder than the wretched
squires of the errant cavalry? And even less bad if we ate, because the
duels, with bread they are less; but maybe we miss a day and two
without having breakfast, if it is not from the wind that blows.
`` All that can be carried and carried, '' said El del Bosque, `` with the
hope we have of the prize; because if it is not too much
unfortunate is the knight-errant whom a squire serves, at least, to
few sets will be rewarded with a beautiful government of any island, or
with a good looking county.
I, "replied Sancho," have already told my master that I am satisfied with the government of
some insula; and he is so noble and so liberal, that he has promised me
many and various times.
I, said the one from the Forest, with a canon will be satisfied with my
services, and my master has already sent me, and how are you!
`` It must be, '' said Sancho, `` your master of your honor, knight at
ecclesiastical, and he will be able to do such favors to his good squires; but
mine is merely layman, although I remember when they wanted to advise him
discreet people, although, in my opinion ill-intentioned, who tried to
be archbishop; but he wanted nothing but to be emperor, and I was then
trembling if he wanted to be from the Church, for not finding me
enough of having benefits for her; because I let you know
Thank you that, although I look like a man, I am a beast to be of the Church.
`` Well, indeed, your mercy is mistaken, '' said the one from the Forest, `because
the island governments are not all of good standing. Some are crooked,
some poor, some malenconic, and finally, the most upright and well
willing brings with it a heavy load of thoughts and discomfort,
that puts on his shoulders the unfortunate who fit him in luck. Fed up better
It would be that those of us who profess this accursed servitude retired to
our houses, and there we entertained ourselves in gentler exercises, such as
if we say, hunting or fishing; what, what squire is so poor in the
world, who is missing a nag, and a pair of greyhounds, and a fishing pole,
what to entertain yourself with in your village?
"I don't lack anything deso," answered Sancho, "it is true that I have no
nag, but I have a donkey worth twice as much as my master's horse.
God give me a bad Easter, and be the first to come, if I exchange him for him,
even if they gave me four bushels of barley on top. You will have a mockery
Merciful the courage of my red, which is the color of my donkey. Then
greyhounds were not to be lacking, having surpluses in my town; and more,
which then is the most enjoyable hunt when it is done at the expense of others.
`` Really and truly, '' replied the one from the Forest, `` Mr. Squire, I have
proposed and determined to stop these gentlemen's drunkenness, and
retire to my village, and raise my children, I have three like three
oriental pearls.
`` I have two, '' said Sancho, `` who can present themselves to the Pope in person,
especially a girl whom I raise to be a countess, if God be
served, although in spite of his mother.
-And how old is that lady who is raised to be a countess? asked the
Forest.
`` Fifteen years, two more unless, '' answered Sancho, `` but it's as big as
a spear, and as cool as an April morning, and has a strength of a
ganapan.
`` Those are the parts, '' replied the one from the Forest, `` not only to be a countess, but
to be a nymph of the green forest. Oh you whore, whore, and what a fuck you must
have the mischievous!
To which Sancho responded, somewhat sullen:
-Neither she is a whore, nor was her mother, nor will either of them be, God
Quirking while I live And speak to yourself more restrained, that, for
your mercy have been raised among knights errant, who are the same
courtesy, those words do not seem very agreed.
`` Oh, how bad is your mercy understood, '' replied the one from the Forest of
ailment of praise, sir squire! How and don't you know that when some
gentleman gives a good throw to the bull in the square, or when some person
does something well done, the common people say: "Oh, you whore, whore, and
how well he has done it !? "And what seems vituperative, in that
term, is remarkable praise; and deny you, sir, of the sons or daughters
who do not do works that deserve similar praise to their parents.
`` Yes, I do deny it, '' answered Sancho, `` and of course, and for that very reason, I could
throw your mercy on me and my children and my wife a whole whore on top,
because everything they do and say is worthy of our peers
praises, and to see them again I pray to God to remove me from sin
mortal, that the same will be if he takes me out of this dangerous occupation of squire, in
which I have incurred the second time, primed and cheated out of a bag with a hundred
ducats that I found myself one day in the heart of Sierra Morena, and the devil
puts before your eyes here, there, not here, but there, a bag full of
Doubloons, it seems to me that at every step I touch it with my hand, and I hug
with him, and I take him home, and take census, and fund rents, and live as a
the prince; and the time I think about this they make me easy and bearable
How many jobs do I have with this fool of my master, whom I know
He has more of a madman than a gentleman.
"That is why," replied the one from the Forest, "they say that greed breaks the sack; what if
is going to deal with them, there is no other greater in the world than my master, because he is from
those who say: "Other people's cares kill the ass"; Well, why do I get paid?
another gentleman the judgment that he has lost, he plays the madman, and is looking for
what I do not know if after found it has to come out to the snouts.
-And is he in love, by the way?
`` Yes, '' said the one from the Forest, `` from a certain Casildea de Vandalia, the crudest and
the most roasted lady that in the whole world can be found; but he does not limp from
foot of rawness, that other greater lies growl in his gut, and
it will say before many hours.
`` There is no path so flat, '' Sancho replied, `` that does not have some stumble or
ravine; In other houses they cook beans, and in mine, boiled; plus
accompanied and goofy must have the madness that the discretion. More yes
It is true what is commonly said, that having companions in
works usually serve as a relief in them, with your grace I will be able to
console me, for it serves another master as foolish as mine.
`` Foolish, but brave, '' replied the one from the Forest, `` and more rogue than foolish and
how brave.
"That is not mine," Sancho answered.
before he has a soul like a pitcher: he does not know how to harm anyone, but good
to all, nor does he have any malice: a child will make him understand that it is night
in the middle of the day; and for this simplicity I love him like my fabrics
heart, and I am not ready to leave him, no matter how crazy he does.
`` With all that, brother and lord, '' said the one from the Forest, `` if the blind man guides the
blind, both are in danger of falling into the hole. It is better to retire with good
compass of feet, and return to our desires; that those who seek
adventures are not always good.
Sancho often spat, apparently, a certain kind of sticky saliva and
somewhat dry; which seen and noticed by the charitable forest squire,
said:
- It seems to me that of what we have spoken our tongues stick to the palate;
but I bring a detacher pending the saddle of my horse, which is such
like good.
And, getting up, he went back from there to a little with a large cask of wine and
a half stick pie; and it is not expensive, because it was from a rabbit
albar, so big that Sancho, when he touched it, understood to be from some bastard, no
that of kid; which, seen by Sancho, said:
"And does this bring your grace with it, sir?"
-Well, what did you think? replied the other. Am I any
squire of water and wool? Better spare part I bring on my haunches
horse that he carries with him when a general is on his way.
Sancho ate without asking, and swallowed morsels of knots of
loose. And said:
-Your grace is a faithful and legal squire, cool and ordinary,
magnificent and great, as this banquet shows, that if you have not come here
by art of enchantment, resemble it, at least; and not like me, mean and
unfortunate, that I only bring in my saddlebags a little cheese, so hard
that can dismantle a giant with it, who is kept company by four
dozens of carob beans and as many hazelnuts and walnuts, mercedes a la
narrowness of my owner, and to the opinion he has and the order he keeps that
knights errant are not to be maintained and sustained but with fruits
dry and with the herbs of the field.
`` By my faith, brother, '' replied the one from the Forest, `` that I have not done the
stomach to tagarninas, nor to piruétanos, nor to roots of the mountains. Over there
have it with their opinions and chivalric laws our masters, and eat what
that they send. I bring lunch boxes, and this boot hanging from the
chair, yes or no; and she is so devoted to mine and I love her so much that few
times go by without giving her a thousand kisses and a thousand hugs.
And, saying this, he put it in the hands of Sancho, who, lifting it,
put in his mouth, he gazed at the stars for a quarter of an hour, and
finishing drinking, he dropped his head to one side, and, with a great sigh,
said:
-Oh you bastard scoundrel, and how Catholic he is!
`` Do you see there, '' said El del Bosque, hearing Sancho's hideout, `` how
have you praised this wine by calling it a whore?
`` I say, '' answered Sancho, `` that I confess that I know that it is not a disgrace
Call no one a son of a bitch, when it falls below the understanding of
praise him. But tell me, sir, for the century of what you want most: this wine
is it from Ciudad Real?
-Bravo milestone! answered the one from the Forest. In truth it is not from another
part, and that he is some years old.
-Me with that! Sancho said. Do not take less, but let it go to me
Forget reaching out to your knowledge. Will it not be good, Mr. Squire, that
I have such a great and natural instinct, when it comes to knowing wines,
that, in giving myself to smell anyone, I hit the homeland, the lineage, the taste,
and the hard one, and the turns it has to give, with all the circumstances at
wine atañederas? But there is no wonder, if I had in my lineage by
part of my father the two most excellent landmarks that in long years
he knew La Mancha; for proof of which what happened to them now I will say:
«They gave the two of them to taste the wine from a vat, asking their opinion
of the state, quality, goodness or malice of the wine. The one tested it with the
tip of the tongue, the other did not do more to reach it to the nose. The
The first said that the wine tasted like iron, the second said that it tasted more like
Cordoba. The owner said that the vat was clean, and that this wine was not
It had some marinade where it would have tasted like iron or cordovan.
With all that, the two famous landmarks were affirmed in what they had said.
Time passed, the wine was sold, and when cleaning the vat they found in
she a small key, hanging from a cordovan strap. " Because see
your mercy if whoever comes from this breed will be able to give his opinion in
such causes.
-That's why I say -said the one from the Forest- that we stop looking for
adventure; and, since we have loaves, let's not look for cakes, and let's go back to
our huts, that God will find us there, if He wants.
-Until my master arrives in Zaragoza, I will serve him; that later we all
we will understand.
Finally the two good squires talked so much and drank so much that
needed the dream of tying their tongues and quenching their thirst, which
taking it off was impossible; and so, holding on to both of the already almost empty
boot, with the half-chewed morsels in their mouths, they fell asleep,
where we will leave you for now, to tell what the Knight of the Forest
it happened with the Sad Figure.
Chapter XIV. Where the adventure of the Knight of the Forest continues
Among many reasons that Don Quixote and the Knight of the Jungle passed,
The story goes that the one from the Forest told Don Quixote:
-Finally, sir knight, I want you to know that my destiny, or, for
better to say, my choice, led me to fall in love with the unparalleled Casildea de
Vandalia. Call her unparalleled because she doesn't have him, like this in the greatness of the body
as in the extreme of state and beauty. This such Casildea, then,
that I am counting, paid my good thoughts and restrained wishes with
to occupy me, like his godmother Hercules, in many and diverse dangers,
promising me at the end of each one that in the end of the other would come my
hope; but that is how my works have been linked, which do not have
I count, I don't even know which one will be the last one that starts the fulfillment
of my good wishes. He once commanded me to go challenge that
famous giantess of Seville called the Giralda, who is so brave and strong
as made of bronze, and, without moving from one place, it is the most movable and
Voluntary woman of the world. I arrived, vila, and beat her, and made her stay there
It strikes, because in more than a week only north winds blew. Time
There was also someone who ordered me to take the ancient stones of the
brave Toros de Guisando, a company more to be entrusted to ganapanes than
gentlemen. Again he commanded me to rush and plunge into the chasm of
Goat, an unprecedented and fearful danger, and a particular relationship of
what is enclosed in that dark depth. I stopped the movement at
Giralda, I weighed the Toros de Guisando, fell into the chasm and brought to light what
hidden from its abyss, and my hopes, dead than dead, and their
commandments and disdain, alive than alive. In resolution, lately I have
commanded to run through all the provinces of Spain and make confess to
all the errant knights who wander through them that she alone is the most
Outstanding in beauty of how many live today, and that I am the bravest
and the rather in love knight of the orb; in whose demand I have already walked the
most of Spain, and in it I have defeated many gentlemen who have
daring to contradict me. But what I pride myself on the most is
having defeated, in a singular battle, that so famous knight Don
Quixote de la Mancha, and I make him confess that my Casildea is more beautiful than
his Dulcinea; and in only this expiration I realize that I have expired all
the knights of the world, because this Don Quixote I say has defeated them
to all; and, having overcome him, his glory, his fame and his honor have been
transferred and passed on to me;
and both the victor is more honored,
the more the loser is reputed;
So, I already run on my own and the innumerable feats of the ya are mine.
referred to Don Quixote.
Don Quixote was amazed to hear the Knight of the Forest, and he was a thousand
times for telling him he was lying, and he already had the lie on the tip of his tongue;
but he reported the best he could, for making him confess by his own mouth
his lie; and thus, calmly said to him:
-That your mercy, sir knight, has defeated the most gentlemen
Wanderers from Spain, and even from all over the world, I don't say anything; but that there is
defeated Don Quixote de la Mancha, put him in doubt. Could it be
another that resembled it, although there are few that resemble it.
-How not? replied the one from the Forest. For the sky that covers us, that I fought
with Don Quixote, and I beat him and surrendered; and he is a tall man with a dry body
face, long and countersunk of limbs, graying, the nose aquiline and
somewhat crooked, with large, black, drooping mustaches. Field under the name
of the Knight of the Sad Figure, and brings as a squire a farmer
called Sancho Panza; press the spine and control the bridle of a famous horse
called Rocinante, and, finally, has as mistress of his will a certain
Dulcinea del Toboso, once called Aldonza Lorenzo; like mine, that,
For being called Casilda and being from Andalusia, I call her Casildea de
Vandalia. If all these signs are not enough to prove my truth, here
there is my sword, which will make her give credit to the same unbelief.
`` Calm down, sir knight, '' said Don Quixote, `` and listen to what I say to you.
want. You must know that this Don Quixote you say is the greatest friend that
in this world I have, and so much, that I can say that I have him instead of me
same person, and that by the signs that you have given me, so punctual and
certain, I can not think but it is the same that you have won. For other
part, I see with my eyes and touch with my hands not being possible to be the same,
if it were not already that as he has many charming enemies,
especially one that ordinarily pursues you, there are not any of the
taken his figure to allow himself to be defeated, for defrauding him of the fame that his
high knights have him raised and acquired by everything discovered
from the earth. And, for confirmation of this, I also want you to know that the
such charming their opposites have not more than two days that they transformed
the figure and person of the beautiful Dulcinea del Toboso in a vulgar and
go down, and in this way they will have transformed Don Quixote; and if all this does not
it is enough to find out in this truth that I say, here is the same gift
Quixote, who will sustain it with his weapons on foot, or on horseback, or
any luck that you like.
And, saying this, he rose to his feet and grasped his sword, hoping that
resolution would take the Knight of the Forest; which, with a voice likewise
calm, she answered and said:
-The good payer does not hurt clothes: the one that once, Mr. Don Quixote,
could defeat you transformed, may well hope to surrender in
your own being. But, because it is not good for gentlemen to make their
Dates of dark weapons, like robbers and ruffians, let's wait for the day,
so that the sun can see our works. And it must be a condition of our
battle that the defeated must remain at the will of the victor, so that
do with him all you want, as long as it is decent to a gentleman what
will be ordered.
"I am more than happy in condition and convenience," answered Don Quixote.
And, in saying this, they went to where their squires were, and found them
snoring and in the same way they were when they fell asleep.
They woke them up and ordered them to get the horses ready, because, in
When the sun rose, the two were to make a bloody, singular and
unequal battle; whose news Sancho was astonished and astonished, fearful
of his master's health, for the bravery he had heard from his master's
squire of the Forest; but, without speaking a word, the two squires left
to look for his cattle, since all three horses and the roe had smelled each other,
and they were all together.
On the way the one from the Forest said to Sancho:
-You must know, brother, that the fighters of the
Andalusia, when they are godparents of a dispute, do not be idle.
on hand while their godchildren quarrel. Say it because you are warned
that while our owners quarrel, we too have to fight and
splinter us.
`` That custom, Mr. Squire, '' answered Sancho, `` there you can run and
pass with the ruffians and brawlers that he says, but with the squires of the
knights errant, I don't think so. At least I haven't heard myself say
I love such a custom, and knows by heart all the ordinances of the
errant cavalry. The more, that I want it to be true and ordinance
It expresses the fighting of squires while their masters fight; but not me
I want to fulfill it, but pay the penalty that was placed on such
peaceful squires, which I assure you will not exceed two pounds of wax, and
more I want to pay the such pounds, which I know will cost me less than the
Hilas that I will be able to spend to heal my head, that I already count it for
split and divided into two parts. There is more: that it makes it impossible for me to quarrel
not have a sword, because in my life I wore it.
-For that I know a good remedy -said the one from the Forest-: I bring here two
canvas bags, of the same size: you will take one, and I the other, and
we will fight back with bags, with equal weapons.
`` That way, be it in good time, '' answered Sancho, `` because first the
such a fight to dust us than to hurt us.
`` It must not be like that, '' replied the other, `` because they have to lie inside the
bags, why don't the air take them away, half a dozen pretty pebbles and
peeled, weighing as much one as the other, and in this way we
We will be able to arrive without hurting ourselves.
"Look, my father's body," answered Sancho, "what sable chives, or
What flakes of carded cotton do you put in your bags, so as not to get ground
the hooves and made henna the bones! But even if they were filled with cocoons
of silk, know, my lord, that I am not to fight: let our masters fight, and there
have it, and let us drink and live, that time is careful of
take our lives, without looking for appetites to end
before reaching their season and term and that they fall when they are ripe.
"Still," replied the one from the Forest, "we have to fight at least half an hour."
`` Not that, '' answered Sancho, `` I will not be so impolite or so ungrateful,
that with whom I have eaten and drunk has any question, no matter how minimal
be; how much more that, being without anger and without anger, who the hell has
from rigging to quarreling?
-For that -said the one from the Forest- I will give a sufficient remedy: and that is,
Before we start the fight, I will arrive beautifully at your mercy
and I will give him three or four slaps, that he hits my feet, with which
I will arouse his anger, even if he is sleepy than a dormouse.
"Against that cut I know another," answered Sancho, "who is not behind him:
I will take a club, and, before your grace comes to wake me
anger, I will make me sleep with my sticks so that hers will not wake up
If it were not in the other world, in which it is known that I am not the man who
I let myself grope anyone's face; and each one looks for the bolt, although
the most successful thing would be to let everyone sleep their anger, nobody knows
the soul of no one, and such usually comes for wool that returns threequilled; and God
blessed peace and cursed fights, because if a cat harassed, locked up and
tight turns into a lion, I, who am a man, God knows what I can do
turn around; and thus, from now on intimate at your mercy, sir squire, that
All the evil and damage that will result from our quarrel may be your responsibility.
"All right," replied the one from the Forest. God will dawn and we will thrive.
In this, already began to chirp in the trees a thousand lots of painted
little birds, and in their diverse and joyful songs they seemed to give the
norabuena and greeted the fresh dawn, which by the doors and balconies
from the East was discovering the beauty of her face, shaking off her
hair an infinite number of liquid pearls, in whose soft liquor
bathing the herbs, it seemed as well that they sprouted and rained
white and small pearl; the willows were pouring tasty manna, they laughed
fountains, the streams murmured, the forests rejoiced and the
meadows with his coming. But the clarity of the day hardly gave place to see and
differentiate things, when the first to be offered in the eyes of
Sancho Panza was the nose of the Forest squire, who was so big that
it almost overshadowed the entire body. Tell yourself, in effect, that it was from
too big, crooked in the middle and all full of warts, colored
purple, like eggplant; lower two fingers below his mouth; whose
grandeur, color, warts and stooping thus made his face ugly, which, in
Seeing him Sancho, he began to wound foot and hand, like a child with an alferecia,
and proposed in his heart to allow himself to be slapped a hundred before
to awaken the anger to quarrel with that vestige.
Don Quixote looked at his container, and found his headpiece already on and
so that he could not see his face, but he noticed that he was a thick man, and not
very tall in body. On the weapons he wore an overwatch or jacket of a
cloth, apparently, of very fine gold, sown by it many small moons
of shining mirrors, which made him in a very great way gallant and
colorful; a large quantity of green feathers flew over his hat,
yellow and white; the spear, which was leaning against a tree, was
very large and thick, and of a steely iron of more than a hand.
Don Quixote looked at everything and everything was noticed by Don Quixote, and judged from what he had seen and seen that
The already said knight must have been of great strength; But not for that
he feared, like Sancho Panza; Earlier, with gentle boldness, he said to the Knight of
The mirrors:
-If you want to fight, sir, do not waste your courtesy,
I ask you to raise the visor a little, because I see if the gallantry of
your face responds to that of your disposition.
-Either conquered or victorious that you leave this company, gentleman gentleman -answered
the one with the Mirrors-, you will have too much time and space to see me; what if
now I do not satisfy your desire, it is by appearing to me that I make remarkable
offense to the beautiful Casildea de Vandalia in delaying the time it will take
in raising my visor, without making you confess what you already know that I intend.
`` Well, as long as we get on horseback, '' said Don Quixote, `` you may well
tell me if I am that Don Quixote you said you had won.
`` To that we answer, '' said the one with Mirrors, `` that you seem, as I know.
it looks like one egg to another, to the same knight that I defeated; but, according to you
you say that they are chasing you charming, I will not dare to affirm if you are the content
or not.
"That is enough for me," answered Don Quixote, "for me to believe your deception;
However, to get you out of it at all times, let our horses come; what in
less time than it would take you to raise your visor, yes God, yes my
lady and my arm are worth me, I will see your face, and you will see that I am not
I, the defeated Don Quixote, what do you think?
With this, shortening reasons, they mounted their horses, and Don Quixote turned
reins to Rocinante to take what was convenient from the field, to return to
find his opposite, and so did the one with the Mirrors. But I do not know
Don Quixote had taken twenty paces, when he heard the call of the one of the
Mirrors, and, as the two of them parted the way, the one with Mirrors said to him:
"Notice, sir knight, that the condition of our battle is that the
defeated, as I have said again, must be at the discretion of the winner.
"I know," answered Don Quixote; provided that what is imposed and
I will send the loser must be things that do not go beyond the limits of the
chivalry.
"So it is understood," replied the one with the Mirrors.
In this they offered him in front of Don Quixote the strange noses of the
squire, and was no less astonished to see them than Sancho; so much so that he judged him
by some monster, or by a new man and of those that are not used in the
world. Sancho, who saw his master leave to take a career, did not want to stay
only with the proboscis, fearing that with just a passagonzalo with those
noses in his, his quarrel would be over, leaving the blow, or
of fear, lying on the ground, and went after his master, clinging to an action of
Rocinante; and, when it seemed to him that it was time for him to return, he said:
`` I beg your mercy, my lord, that before he meets me again
help to climb on that cork oak, from where I can see more of my flavor,
better than from the ground, the gallant find that your grace has to
do with this gentleman.
`` I used to think, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` that you want to climb up and climb
scaffolding to safely see the bulls.
`` The truth that he tells, '' answered Sancho, `` the wild noses of that
squire they have me astonished and full of terror, and I dare not be together
to the.
`` They are such, '' said Don Quixote, `` that, unless I am who I am, I also
they will amaze; And so, come: help you to go up where you say.
As Don Quixote stopped Sancho from climbing into the cork oak,
he took the one of the Mirrors of the field what seemed necessary to him; and, believing
that Don Quixote would have done the same, without waiting for a trumpet or other
signal to warn them, he turned the reins to his horse - which was no more
light nor better-looking than Rocinante-, and, at all his running, that he was a
medium trot, he was going to meet his enemy; but, seeing him busy in the
Sancho's climb, stopped the reins and stopped in the middle of the race, from
what the horse was very grateful, because it could no longer move.
Don Quixote, who seemed to him that his enemy was already flying, approached
spurs to Rocinante's flanked racks, and made him
prod so, that tells the story that this only time was met
to have run something, because all the others were always jogs
declared; and with this unseen fury he arrived where the one with the mirrors was
driving his horse's spurs to the buttons, without being able to
move a single finger from the place where he had made his career watertight.
In this good season and conjuncture, Don Quixote found his opposite pregnant
with his horse and busy with his spear, who never, or did not hit, or did not have
instead of putting it at the ready. Don Quixote, who did not look at these
inconvenient, safe and secure, he found the one of the
Mirrors with such force, that to his degree he made him come to the ground for
the horse's haunches, giving such a fall that, without moving foot or hand, it
signs that he was dead.
Sancho scarcely saw him down when he slipped from the cork oak and
Haste came where his lord was, who, alighting from Rocinante, went
over the one with Mirrors, and, removing the loops of his helmet to see if
he was dead and to give him air if he was alive; and saw...
Who can say what he saw, without causing admiration, wonder and fear to
those who hear it? He saw, the story says, the face itself, the same figure,
the same aspect, the same physiognomy, the same effigy, the same pespetive
the bachelor Sansón Carrasco; And, just as he saw her, in loud voices he said:
-Come on, Sancho, and look what you have to see and you won't believe it! Needle, son,
and warns what magic can, what sorcerers and wizards can
lovely!
Sancho arrived, and as he saw the face of the bachelor Carrasco, he began to
make a thousand crosses and cross themselves as many. In all this, he did not give
There were signs of the demolished knight being alive, and Sancho said to Don Quixote:
I am of the opinion, my lord, that, by yes or by not, your mercy kneel and
put the sword through the mouth of this one who looks like the bachelor Sansón Carrasco;
perhaps he will kill one of his enemies the enchanters.
"You are not saying wrong," said Don Quixote, "because of the enemies, the least."
And, drawing his sword to put into effect Sancho's advice and advice,
The squire of the Mirrors arrived, already without the noses that were so ugly to him.
they had done, already loud voices said:
-Look at your mercy what you are doing, Mr. Don Quixote, that the one with the
Feet is the bachelor Samson Carrasco, his friend, and I am his squire.
And, seeing him Sancho without that first ugliness, he said:
-And the noses?
To which he replied:
-Here I have them, in the skirt.
And, reaching to the right, he took out some noses of paste and varnish,
mask, of the manifatura that are delineated. And, looking at him more and more
Sancho, with a large and admiring voice, said:
"Holy Mary, and let me go!" Isn't this Tomé Cecial, my neighbor and my compadre?
-And as if I am! -answered the already desnarigado squire-: Tomé Cecial
I am, compadre and friend Sancho Panza, and then I will tell you the arcaduces, lies
and entanglements where I have come from here; and meanwhile, ask and plead with the Lord
let your master not touch, mistreat, injure or kill the knight of the
Mirrors, which he has at his feet, because without a doubt he is the daring and evil
advised by high school graduate Sansón Carrasco, our compatriot.
In this, the one with the Mirrors came to himself, which, seen by Don Quixote,
He put the bare point of his sword over his face, and said:
"You are dead, sir, if you do not confess that the unique Dulcinea del Toboso
your Casildea de Vandalia is ahead in beauty; and other of this
you have to promise, if you stay alive from this conflict and fall, to go
to the city of Toboso and present yourselves in his presence on my behalf, so that
do of you what comes most at will; and if I leave you in the
yours, also you must return to look for me, that the trace of my exploits
It will serve as a guide to bring you where I am, and to tell me what with
she would have passed; conditions that, according to the ones we put before
of our battle, they do not leave the terms of the errant cavalry.
`` I confess, '' said the fallen knight, `` that the unstitched shoe is worth more and
dirty of Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso that badly combed beards, although
clean, of Casildea, and I promise to go and return from her presence to the
yours, and give you a complete and particular account of what you ask of me.
`` You must also confess and believe, '' added Don Quixote, `` that that
The knight you defeated was not and could not have been Don Quixote de la Mancha, but
another who resembled him, as I confess and I believe that you, although you seem the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco, you are not, but someone else who seems to him, and that in his
figure here my enemies have put me, to stop and temper the
impetus of my anger, and so that I softly use the glory of
expiration.
-All I confess, I judge and I feel how you believe, judge and feel it
replied the dejected knight. Let me get up, I beg you, if at all
The blow of my fall allows it, how battered I am.
Don Quixote and Tomé Cecial, his squire, of whom he did not
Sancho averted his eyes, asking him questions whose answers gave him
manifest signs that it was truly the Tomé Cecial he was saying; more
the apprehension that in Sancho had done what his master said, that the
charmers had changed the figure of the Knight of Mirrors into that of the
Bachelor Carrasco, did not allow him to believe the truth that with his eyes
was looking. Finally, they were left with this master and groom deception, and that of
The Mirrors and their squire, sulking and sullen, turned away from Don
Quixote and Sancho, with the intention of looking for some place where they
splinting his ribs. Don Quixote and Sancho resumed their
road to Zaragoza, where history leaves them, to realize who he was
the Knight of Mirrors and his close-knit squire.
Chapter XV. Where it is told and given news of who was the Knight of the
Mirrors and his squire
Don Quixote was extremely happy, proud and vainglorious for having
achieved victory from as brave a knight as he imagined himself to be the
of Mirrors, from whose chivalrous word I hoped to know if the
enchantment of his mistress passed forward, for it was necessary that the
defeated knight returned, on pain of not being, to give a reason for what
with her it would have happened. But one thought Don Quixote and another thought of the
Mirrors, since at that time his thought was none other than to seek
where to bizmarse, as has been said.
Thus, the story says that when the bachelor Sansón Carrasco advised
Don Quixote to resume his neglected chivalry, it was because he had
entered first in bureo with the priest and the barber on what means could
take to reduce Don Quixote to being at home quiet and
calm, without being disturbed by his ill-sought adventures; of which
Council came out, by common vote of all and Carrasco's particular opinion,
let Don Quixote go, since stopping him seemed impossible, and that
Samson went out on the road as a knight errant, and waged battle with
him, because he would not miss on what, and beat him, taking it as an easy thing, and
that it be a pact and concert that the defeated be at the mercy of the victor; and
thus defeated Don Quixote, the bachelor knight had to send him
returned to his town and home, and did not leave it for two years, or until
that something else should be commanded to him; which was clear that Don Quixote
expired would undoubtedly comply, by not contravening and breaking the laws
cavalry, and it could be that at the time of his seclusion he was
forget their vanities, or give place to look to their madness for some
convenient remedy.
Carrasco accepted him, and Tomé Cecial, compadre and
neighbor of Sancho Panza, a happy man with pike helmets. Samson was armed
as mentioned, and Tomé Cecial placed the
false and mask already said, because he was not known to his compadre
when they saw each other; and thus, they followed the same journey that Don Quixote was taking,
and they almost found themselves in the adventure of the chariot of Death. AND,
finally, they found them in the forest, where everything that the
prudent has read; And if it weren't for the extraordinary thoughts of
Don Quixote, who implied that the bachelor was not the bachelor, the
Mr. Bachelor will be forever unable to graduate from
graduate, for not having found nests where he thought to find birds.
Tomé Cecial, who saw how badly he had achieved his wishes and the wrong whereabouts
who had had his way, said to the bachelor:
-By the way, Mr. Samson Carrasco, we have what we deserve: with
It is easy to think about and undertake a company, but with difficulty the most
sometimes it comes out of it. Don Quixote crazy, we sane: he leaves healthy and
Laughing, your grace is crushed and sad. So now let us know what it is
crazier: the one who is so because he can not less, or the one who is because of his will?
To which Samson replied:
-The difference between those two crazy people is that the one who is crazy
It will always be so, and whoever is in degree will cease to be when he wants.
-Well, that's the way it is, said Tomé Cecial, I was mad by my will when I wanted to
become a squire of your mercy, and for the same I want to stop being and
go back to my house.
`` That fulfills you, '' replied Samson, `` because to think that I have to go back to
mine, until don Quixote has been beaten to the ground, is to think about the toilet; and
will not lead me now to seek him the desire to get his judgment, but that of
the revenge; that the great pain in my ribs won't let me do more
pious speeches.
The two were reasoning about this, until they came to a town where it was
luckily to find an algebraist, with whom the unfortunate Samson was cured. Take
Cecial turned and left him, and he was left imagining his revenge; and the
history speaks again of him in his time, for not ceasing to rejoice now
with Don Quixote.
Chapter XVI. Of what happened to Don Quixote with a discreet gentleman from
La Mancha
With the happiness, contentment and pride that has been said, Don Quixote continued his
day, imagining for the past victory to be the most knight-errant
brave that the world was at that age; I was finished and happy
end conducted as many adventures could happen to him from then on; I had
in little to the charms and the enchanters; did not remember the
innumerable sticks that in the discourse of his knights had given him, nor
of the stone that knocked down half of his teeth, nor of the
ungratefulness of the galley slaves, nor of the daring and rain of stakes
of the yangüeses. Finally, he said to each other that if he found art, mode or
way to disenchant his mistress Dulcinea, he will not invade the
fortune that the most successful knight-errant of
the past centuries. Everything was busy in these imaginations, when Sancho
Told him:
"Isn't it good, sir, that I still have the outrageous
noses, and older brand, of my compadre Tomé Cecial?
-And do you think, Sancho, by any chance, that the Knight of Mirrors was the
Bachelor Carrasco; and his squire, Tomé Cecial, your compadre?
"I don't know what to say to that," answered Sancho; I only know that the signs that
He gave my house, wife and children I could not be given other than himself; and the
face, turned off their noses, it was the same as Tomé Cecial, as I have
seen many times in my town and wall in the middle of my own house; and the
Tone of speech was all one.
"We are right, Sancho," replied Don Quixote. Come here: in what
Consideration may fit that the bachelor Sansón Carrasco came as
knight errant, armed with offensive and defensive weapons, to fight
with me? Have I been his enemy by any chance? Have I ever given you a chance
to make me angry? Am I his rival, or does he make a profession of arms,
to have invidious to the fame that I have earned for them?
"Well, what shall we say, sir," answered Sancho, "about looking so much like
that gentleman, whoever leaves, to Bachelor Carrasco, and his squire
to Tomé Cecial, my compadre? And if it is enchantment, as your mercy
He said, weren't there two others in the world who resembled each other?
`` Everything is artifice and trace, '' answered Don Quixote, `` of the evil magicians.
that persecute me, who, anticipating that I was to be victorious in
the contest, they prevented the defeated knight from showing his face
of my friend the bachelor, because the friendship I have for him was put between
the edges of my sword and the rigor of my arm, and temper the just wrath of
my heart, and in this way the one who with charms and falsehoods
I tried to take mine off. For proof of which you already know, oh Sancho!
from experience that will not let you lie or cheat, how easy it is to
charming to change faces into others, making the beautiful ugly and
the ugly beautiful, because not two days ago that you saw by your own eyes the
beauty and gallantry of the unparalleled Dulcinea in all her integrity and natural
conformity, and I saw her in the ugliness and baseness of a coarse peasant, with
cataracts in the eyes and with a bad smell in the mouth; and more, than the wicked
charming who dared to do such a bad transformation is not much
that Sansón Carrasco's and your compadre's did, for taking away my
glory of the expiration of the hands. But, with all this, I console myself;
because, in short, in whatever figure I have been, I have been the winner of
my enemy.
"God knows the truth of everything," answered Sancho.
And since he knew that Dulcinea's transformation had been trace and
his charm, his master's chimeras did not satisfy him; but he did not love him
reply, not to say a word that would reveal his lie.
In these reasons they were when a man reached them who behind them for
the same road came on a very beautiful tordilla mare, dressed in a
green fine cloth overcoat, draped in tawny velvet, with a cap
of the same velvet; the dressing of the mare was of field and of the genet,
also purple and green. He had a Moorish cutlass hanging wide
baldric of green and gold, and the boots were from the work of the baldric; the
spurs were not gilt, but given with a green varnish, so smooth and
polished that, for doing work with the whole dress, seemed better than if
out of pure gold. When he reached them, the walker greeted them
politely, and, biting the mare, he passed by; but don Quixote
said:
-Lord gallant, if your grace leads the way that we and not
It matters to hurry, it would be a mercy if we left together.
`` Really, '' replied the one with the mare, `` don't let me go so long, otherwise
it was for fear that with the company of my mare that
horse.
"You may well, sir," replied Sancho at this time, "you may well have the
reins to his mare, because our horse is the most honest and well regarded
of the world: never on such occasions has he done any vileness, and once
Who went out of control to do it, my lord and I lashed out with the setenas. Say
once again, may your grace stop, if it wishes; that, although I know it
Give between two plates, surely the horse will not face it.
The walker stopped the rein, admiring the handsomeness and face of Don
Quixote, who went without a trap, which Sancho carried as a suitcase in the
front pommel of the rucio pack; and if the green man looked a lot
Don Quixote, much more did Don Quixote look at the green man, seeming to him
sheet metal man. The age showed to be fifty years; gray hair, few,
and the face, aquiline; the view, between happy and serious; finally, in the
Suit and good looks implied that he was a man of good clothing.
What the green man judged of Don Quixote de la Mancha was that similar
I had never seen him in the manner or appearance of a man: he admired the length of
his horse, the greatness of his body, the weakness and yellowness of his face,
his arms, his manner and composure: figure and portrait not seen for long
times ago in that land. Don Quixote noted well the attention with which
the walker looked at him, and read his wish in the suspension; and how was it so
courteous and so kind to please everyone, before I asked him anything, he
He went out on the road, saying:
-This figure that your mercy has seen in me, for being so new and so out
of those commonly used, I would not wonder if he had
marveled; but he will cease to be so when I tell him, as he
I say, I'm a gentleman
Destos that people say
that they go on their adventures.
I left my homeland, pawned my property, left my gift, and gave myself in the
arms of Fortune, may they take me where I was most served. I wanted
resurrect the already dead errant cavalry, and many days ago, stumbling
here, falling there, falling here and getting up there, I have fulfilled
much of my desire, helping widows, sheltering maidens and
favoring married women, orphans and wards, proper and natural office of
knights errant; and thus, for my courageous, many and Christian deeds
I have already deserved to be in print in almost all or the most nations of the world.
Thirty thousand volumes have been printed of my story, and it is on its way to
be printed thirty thousand times out of thousands, if heaven does not remedy it.
Finally, to enclose everything in a few words, or a single one, I say that
I am Don Quixote de la Mancha, by another name called the Knight of the
Sad Figure; and, since the praises themselves debase, it is necessary to
I may say mine, and this is understood when it is not present
who says them; so, gentleman gentleman, not even this horse, this spear,
neither this shield, nor squire, nor all these weapons together, nor the yellowness
of my face, nor my attenuated weakness, will be able to admire you from now on,
having already known who I am and the profession I do.
Don Quixote was silent in saying this, and the one of the green, as it took
answering him, it seemed that he could not do it; but from there to good space
Told him:
"You are right, sir, to know my wish for my suspension; but no
you have succeeded in taking away from me the wonder that having seen you causes in me;
that, since, like you, sir, you say, that knowing and who you are
could remove, has not been; before, now I know, I am more suspense and
marveled. How and is it possible that there are knights errant in the
world, and that there are printed stories of true chivalry? I can not
persuade that there is today on earth who favors widows, protects
maidens, nor honor wives, nor help orphans, and would not believe it if in
Your grace would not have seen it with my eyes. Blessed be the sky!
with that story, which your grace says is printed, of its high and
true chivalry, the innumerable of the
pretended knights-errant, of which the world was full, so much
good customs and so much to the detriment and discredit of good
stories.
`` There is much to say, '' answered Don Quixote, `` by reason of whether they are fake, or
no, the stories of the errant knights.
-Well, is there anyone who doubts -answered the Green- that such are not false
stories?
"I doubt it," replied Don Quixote, "and keep this here; what if our
hard day, I hope in God to give your mercy to understand that he has done
wrong to go with the flow of those who are certain that they are not
true.
This last reason of Don Quixote the traveler assumed that Don
Quixote must have been some fool, and he hoped that with others he would
confirmed; but, before they amused themselves in other reasoning, don
Quixote begged him to tell him who he was, since he had given him part of his
condition and your life. To which the one in the Green Gabán replied:
-I, Mr. Knight of the Sad Figure, am a natural gentleman of a
place where we will go to eat today, if God is served. I am more than
moderately rich and my name is Don Diego de Miranda; I spend my life with me
wife, and with my children, and with my friends; my exercises are hunting
and fish, but I keep neither hawk nor greyhounds, but some tame buckshot, or
some daring ferret. I have up to six dozen books, which ones about romance
and which of Latin, of history some and of devotion others; those of
cavalry have not yet entered my thresholds. I browse more
those who are profane than devotees, as they are of honest entertainment,
who delight in language and admire and suspend invention, put
there are very few of these in Spain. Ever eat with my neighbors and
friends, and many times I invite you; are my treats clean and neat, and
not at all scarce; nor taste to murmur, nor do I consent that in front of me
murmur; I do not scrutinize the lives of others, nor am I a lynx of the deeds of
others; I hear mass every day; I distribute my goods with the poor, without doing
boast of good works, by not letting the
hypocrisy and vainglory, enemies that softly seize the heart
more demure; I try to put those who I know are out of line at peace; I am
devotee of Our Lady, and I always trust in the infinite mercy of
God our lord.
Sancho was very attentive to the relationship of life and entertainment of the
gentleman; and, seeming to him good and holy and that whoever made it should do
miracles, he threw himself from the dart, and with great haste he went to seize the stirrup
right, and with a devoted heart and almost tears he kissed her feet one and many
times. Having seen this by the gentleman, he asked him:
-What are you doing, brother? What kisses are these?
"Let me kiss," answered Sancho, "because it seems to me your mercy the first
holy to the genet that I have seen in all the days of my life.
"I am not a saint," replied the hidalgo, "but a great sinner;" you do, brother,
that you must be good, as your simplicity shows.
Sancho returned to collect the pack, having brought out the laughter of the
profound mischief of his master and caused new admiration to Don Diego.
Don Quixote asked him how many children he had, and he told him that one of the
things in which the ancient philosophers, who lacked the
true knowledge of God, was in the goods of nature, in the
of fortune, in having many friends and in having many good children.
`` I, Señor Don Quixote, '' replied the hidalgo, `` have a son, who, unless
to have him, perhaps he would judge me as happier than I am; and not because he is
bad, but because it is not as good as I would like. Will be aged ten and
eight years: all six have been in Salamanca, learning Latin languages
and Greek; and when I wanted him to go on to study other sciences, I found him so
embedded in that of poetry, if it can be called science, which is not
possible to make him face that of the laws, which I would like him to study,
nor of the queen of all, theology. I would like it to be the crown of his
lineage, because we live in a century where our kings highly reward
virtuous and good lyrics; because letters without virtue are pearls in the
midden. He spends all day finding out if Homer said good or bad in
such a verse from the Iliad; if Marcial was dishonest, or not, in such
epigram; if such and such verses are to be understood in one way or another
of Virgilio. Anyway, all his conversations are with the books of the
referred poets, and with those of Horacio, Persio, Juvenal and Tibulo; what of
the modern romancistas do not do much account; and, with all the bad darling
which shows to have the poetry of romance, has now vanished the
thoughts of making a gloss to four verses that have been sent to him from
Salamanca, and I think they are just literary.
To all of which Don Quixote replied:
`` Children, sir, are pieces of the entrails of their parents, and thus, they have
of wanting, or good or bad they may be, as the souls that give us love each other
life; It is up to parents to guide them from a young age through the steps of the
virtue, good upbringing and good Christian customs, to
That when they are great they will be the staff of the old age of their fathers and the glory of their
posterity; and in forcing them to study this or that science I do not
I consider it correct, although persuading them will not be harmful; and when I don't know
must study for profit, the student being so fortunate that
Heaven gave him parents to let him, it would seem that they let him
follow that science to which they see you most inclined; and, although that of the
poetry is less useful than delightful, it is not the kind that usually dishonors
who owns them. Poetry, Mr. Hidalgo, in my opinion, is like a
tender and young maiden, and in all respects beautiful, whom they have
careful to enrich, polish and adorn many other maidens, who are
all the other sciences, and she has to use all of them, and all have been
to authorize with her; but this maiden does not want to be groped, nor
brought through the streets, neither published by the corners of the squares nor by
the corners of the palaces. She is made of an alchemy of such virtue,
that whoever knows how to treat it will turn it into pure gold of inestimable price;
hala to have, whoever had it, at bay, not letting it run in clumsy
satires nor in soulless sonnets; it must not be salable in any way,
if it were no longer in heroic poems, in lamentable tragedies, or in comedies
cheerful and contrived; do not let go of the crooks, or the
ignorant vulgar, incapable of knowing or estimating the treasures
enclose. And do not think, sir, that I call here vulgar only the
commoner and humble people; that everyone who does not know, even if it is sir and
prince, you can and should enter the number of the common people. And so, the one with the
requirements that I have said I will treat and have poetry, will be famous and
esteemed his name in all the political nations of the world. And to what
you say, sir, that your son does not value romance poetry very much, give me
to understand that he is not very successful in it, and the reason is this: the great
Homer did not write in Latin, because he was Greek, nor did Virgil write in
Greek, because he was Latin. In resolution, all the ancient poets
wrote in the language that they suckled in the milk, and did not go looking for the
foreigners to declare the highness of their concepts. And, this being so,
reason would be to spread this custom throughout all nations, and that no
the German poet was dismissed because he writes in his language, nor the
Castilian, not even the Biscayan, who writes in his. But your son,
to what I, sir, imagine, must not be wrong with romance poetry,
but with poets who are mere romancists, not knowing other languages ​​or
other sciences that adorn and awaken and aid its natural impulse; and
even in this there may be error; because, according to the true opinion, the poet
born: they mean that the natural poet comes out of his mother's womb
poet; and, with that inclination that heaven gave him, without further study or
artifice, composes things, which makes true the one who said: est Deus in
nobis ..., and so on. I also say that the natural poet who will help himself
art will be much better and the poet will be outdone who just by knowing art
I want to be; the reason is because art does not have an advantage over nature,
but rather outline it; so mixed nature and art, and art
with nature, they will bring out a perfect poet. So let the conclusion be
of my talk, Mr. Hidalgo, may your grace let your son walk through
where your star calls you; that, being as good a student as he should
being, and having already happily climbed the first step of the essences,
which is that of languages, with them he will rise to the top of the
human letters, which look so good on a knight in a cape and
sword, and thus they adorn, honor and magnify him, as mitres to the
bishops, or like the Garnachas to legal experts. Vuesa
Thank your son if he makes satires that damage the honor of others, and
punish him, and break them, but if he makes sermons in the manner of Horace,
where he reproves vices in general, as he so elegantly did,
praise him: because it is lawful for the poet to write against invidiousness, and to say
his verses evil of the invidious, and thus of the other vices, with which no
point to any person; but there are poets who, in exchange for saying a malice,
they will put themselves in danger of being exiled to the islands of Pontus. If the poet
He is chaste in his customs, he will also be chaste in his verses; the pen is
language of the soul: whatever concepts are engendered in it,
such will be his writings; And when kings and princes see the miraculous
science of poetry in prudent, virtuous and serious subjects, they honor,
esteem and enrich them, and even crown them with the leaves of the tree at
who does not offend the lightning, as a sign that they should not be offended by anyone
those who with such crowns see their temples honored and adorned.
The one in the Green Overcoat was admired by Don Quixote's reasoning, and both,
that he was losing the opinion that he had with him, of being foolish. But
half of this talk, Sancho, not being very to his liking, had
diverted from the road to ask for some milk from some shepherds who there together
they were milking some sheep; and, in this, he was already renewing the talk
the hidalgo, extremely satisfied with the discretion and good speech of Don
Quixote, when, raising his head, Don Quixote saw that on the way
where they were going came a cart full of royal flags; and, believing that
It must have been some new adventure, he called out loudly to Sancho that
come to give him the trap. Which Sancho, hearing himself called, left the
shepherds, and with haste he stung the roe deer, and arrived where his master was, at
who happened a frightful and foolish adventure.
Chapter XVII. From where the last point was declared and extreme where it arrived and
the unprecedented spirit of Don Quixote could arrive, with the happily finished
lions adventure
The story goes that when Don Quixote called out to Sancho that
took off his helmet, he was buying some cottage cheese that the shepherds
they sold; and, harassed by the great haste of his master, he did not know what to do with them,
nor in what to bring them, and, in order not to lose them, that he had already paid for them, he agreed
to cast them into the trap of their lord, and with this good message he again saw
what I loved him; who, on arriving, said:
-Give me, friend, that trap; that I know little about adventures, or what there
I discover is someone who needs me, and needs me, to take my
weapons.
The one in the Green Overcoat, who heard this, looked everywhere, and did not
they discovered something other than a car that was coming towards them, with two or three
small flags, which gave him to understand that such a car must have
His Majesty's coin, and so he told Don Quixote; but he did not give
credit, always believing and thinking that everything that happened to him had to
be adventures and more adventures, and thus, he replied to the gentleman:
-Man in the air, half-fought: nothing is lost in that I
notice, that I know from experience that I have visible and invisible enemies,
and I do not know when, or where, or in what time, or in what figures they will
undertake.
And, turning to Sancho, he asked for his trap; which, as there was no place of
take out the cottage cheese, she was forced to give it to him as it was. Took it don
Quixote, and, without his noticing what was coming inside, he hurriedly
he wedged it in his head; and, as the cottage cheese was squeezed and squeezed,
the serum began to run all over Don Quixote's face and beard.
that he received such a fright, that he said to Sancho:
What is this, Sancho, it seems that my hooves are softening, or
they melt the brains, or that I sweat from head to toe? And if I sweat
in truth it is not scary; without a doubt I think the adventure that
agora wants to succeed me. Give me, if you have, to clean me, that the copious
sweat blinds my eyes.
Sancho was silent and gave him a cloth, and with it thanked God that his master
I would not have fallen into the case. Don Quixote cleaned himself up and took off his hat for
see what it was that, in his opinion, cooled his head, and, seeing
those white porridge inside the hat, it reached the nostrils, and in
smelling them he said:
-For the life of my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, who are cottage cheese here
You have made me a traitor, a bergante and a badly regarded squire.
To which, with great phlegm and dissimulation, Sancho replied:
-If they are cottage cheese, give them your grace, I will eat them ... But
the devil eat them, who must have been the one who put them there. I had to have
daring to dirty your mercy's helmet? Found you have the
dared! To faith, sir, to what God gives me to understand, I also owe
to have enchanters who chase me like a make and member of your
mercy, and they will have put that filth there to enrage their patience
and make me grind, as usual, my ribs. Well really what is
Sometimes they have jumped in vague, that I trust in the good speech of my lord,
who will have considered that neither I have cottage cheese, nor milk, nor anything else
worth it, and if I had it, I would put it in my stomach rather than in
The lapel.
"Anything can be," said Don Quixote.
And the gentleman looked at everything, and was amazed at everything, especially when,
After Don Quixote had cleaned his head, face, beard, and headpiece,
he fitted it; and, standing well in the stirrups, requiring the sword and
taking hold of the spear, he said:
-Now, come what may, here I am with the intention of taking myself with him
Satan himself.
In this the car of the flags arrived, in which no other people came
the carter, on the mules, and a man sitting in the lead. Don don
Quixote in front and said:
-Where are you going, brothers? What car is this, what do you have in it and what
flags are these?
To which the carter replied:
-The car is mine; what goes in him are two brave caged lions, which the
General of Oran sent to court, presented to His Majesty; the flags
They belong to the king, our lord, as a sign that his thing is going on here.
-And are lions big? asked Don Quixote.
`` So big, '' replied the man at the door of the car, `` that no
Greater, nor so great, have ever passed from Africa to Spain; and I am the
Leonero, and I have passed others, but like these, none. They are female and male;
the male goes in this cage first, and the female in the back one; and now they go
hungry because they haven't eaten today; and so, your mercy deviates, which is
It is necessary to arrive quickly where we feed them.
To which Don Quixote said, smiling a little:
-Lions to me? Little lions, and at such hours? Well, by God they have
to see those gentlemen who send them here if I am a man who is scared of
lions! Stand down, good man, and, since you are the lion man, open those cages and
throw me those beasts out, that in the middle of this campaign I will make them known
who is Don Quixote de la Mancha, despite and despite the charming
that they send them to me.
-Ta, ta! said the hidalgo among himself at this time, "given a sign of who
is our good gentleman: the cottage cheese, without a doubt, has softened the
helmets and matured brains.
In this Sancho came to him and said:
-Sir, for whom God is, may your mercy do so that my lord gift
Don Quixote is not taken with these lions, that if it is taken, here they have to do us
pieces to all.
`` Well, is your master so mad, '' replied the gentleman, `` that you fear, and
do you think it has to be taken with such fierce animals?
"He is not crazy," answered Sancho, "but daring."
"I will make it not be," replied the hidalgo.
And when he came to Don Quixote, who was urging the lion man to open
the cages, he said:
Sir knight, knights errant must undertake the adventures that
promise hope of getting out of them well, and not those that
remove; because the courage that enters the jurisdiction of recklessness,
it has more of madness than of strength. The more, that these lions don't
come against your mercy, nor do they dream of it: they are presented to His Majesty, and
it will not be good to stop them or impede their journey.
`` Go your grace, Senor Hidalgo, '' replied Don Quixote, `` to understand with
your meek pellet and with your daring ferret, and let each one do their
job. This is mine, and I know whether or not these gentlemen are coming to me.
And, turning to the lion man, he said:
-I vote for such, don knave, that if you do not open the cages later, that with
I have to sew this spear for you with the cart!
The carter, who saw the determination of that armed fantasy, said to him:
-My Lord, may your mercy be served, out of charity, let me
mules and be safe with them before the lions are drawn,
because if they kill them, I'll be finished off for my whole life; that I do not have
another farm but this car and these mules.
-O man of little faith! replied Don Quixote, `` get down and get down, and do what
that you want, that soon you will see that you worked in vain and that you could
save this diligence.
The cart driver got out and disengaged with great haste, and the lion man said loudly
voices:
-Be my witnesses how many here are how against my will and forced open
the cages and release the lions, and that I protest to this man that all the
evil and damage that these beasts did run and go on their own, with more
my wages and rights. Your mercies, gentlemen, get paid
Before it opens, I'm sure they won't hurt me.
Once again the gentleman persuaded him not to do such a foolish thing, which was
tempt God to undertake such nonsense. To which Don Quixote replied that he
he knew what he was doing. The gentleman replied to take a good look at him, that he
he understood that he was delusional.
`` Now, sir, '' replied Don Quixote, `` if your grace does not want to be a listener
emphasize that in your opinion it must be a tragedy, hit the road and get in
except.
Hearing which for Sancho, with tears in his eyes, he begged him to desist from
such an undertaking, in whose comparison had been painted cakes and bread that of the
windmills and the fearful fullers, and, finally, all the
feats that he had undertaken in all the speech of his life.
"Look, sir," Sancho would say, "there is no charm or anything worth it here;
that I have seen through the gates and cracks of the cage a nail of
true lion, and I find out for her that the so-called lion, whose must be the so-called
nail, is bigger than a mountain.
"Fear, at least," answered Don Quixote, "will make you look older."
than half the world. Retire, Sancho, and leave me; and if he dies here, now
you know our old concert: you will go to Dulcinea, and I won't tell you more.
To these he added other reasons, with which he removed the hope that there was no
to stop pursuing your maddened attempt. I would like the one with the Green Gabán
to oppose him, but he saw unequal in arms, and he did not think sanity
to be taken with a madman, who had already seemed so completely Don Quixote;
who, again hurrying the lion and reiterating the threats, gave
occasion to the nobleman to bite the mare, and Sancho to the rucio, and the carter
to his mules, all trying to get as far away from the cart as possible,
before the lions were unleashed.
Sancho mourned the death of his lord, who this time without a doubt believed that
it came in the claws of lions; he cursed his fortune, and called
the hour when it came to the thought of serving him again diminished; but no
for crying and lamenting he stopped beating the red deer to get away from the
car. So the lion man saw that those who were fleeing were already well
deviated, he again required and intimated Don Quixote what had already
required and intimidated, who replied that he heard him, and that he not be cured of
more intimations and requests, that everything would be of little fruit, and that
hurry up.
In the space it took for the lion to open the first cage, he was
considering Don Quixote if it would be good to do the battle before on foot than
horse; and, finally, he determined to do it on foot, fearing that Rocinante
he would be shocked at the sight of the lions. For this he jumped off the horse,
threw down the spear and embraced the shield, and, drawing his sword, stepped before
step, with marvelous boldness and a brave heart, he went to stand before
of the chariot, entrusting himself to God with all his heart, and then to his mistress
Dulcinea.
And it is to know that, reaching this step, the author of this true
history exclaims and says: `` Oh strong and, above all, exaggerated, spirited
Don Quixote de la Mancha, mirror where all the brave can look
of the world, second and new Don Manuel de León, who was the glory and honor of
the Spanish gentlemen! With what words will I tell this dreadful
feat, or with what reasons will I make it credible for centuries to come, or what
praise there will be that they do not suit you and fit, even if they are hyperbole on
all the hyperbole? You on foot, you alone, you fearless, you magnanimous, with
only a sword, and not of the cutter dog, with a shield not of
very bright and clean steel, you are waiting and attending the two most
fierce lions that never raised the African jungles. Your same facts
Be those who praise you, brave manchego, that I leave them here at their point
for missing words with which to make them more expensive. ''
Here the aforementioned exclamation of the author ceased, and he went forward, knotting the
thread of the story, saying that, seeing the lioness already put in position to
Don Quixote, and that he could not stop releasing the male lion, on pain of falling
in the disgrace of the outraged and daring knight, he opened wide the
first cage, where was, as has been said, the lion, which seemed to be
extraordinary grandeur and frightening and ugly tasting. The first he did
It was to stir in the cage, where he had been lying, and to stretch out his claw, and
stretch all; then he opened his mouth and yawned very slowly, and almost
two palms of tongue that he stuck out, dusted his eyes and washed the
face; done this, he stuck his head out of the cage and looked everywhere
with eyes made embers, sight and gesture to frighten it
temerity. Only Don Quixote looked at him attentively, wishing he would jump
the car and come with it to the hands, between which he thought to make
pieces.
Up to here came the extreme of his never seen madness. But the generous
lion, more restrained than arrogant, ignoring childishness, nor
bravado, after having looked from one side to the other, as has been said,
turned his back and showed his rear parts to Don Quixote, and with great
Phlegm and backwater was thrown back into the cage. Seeing which Don Quixote,
He ordered the lion man to beat him and irritate him to drive him out.
`` I will not do that, '' replied the lion man, `` because if I instigate him, the first
the one who will tear apart is myself. Your mercy, sir knight,
content with what's done, which is all that can be said in the genre of
courage, and do not want to tempt second fortune. The lion has open the
door: it is in his hand to go out, or not to go out; but, well, it has not come out until
now, it won't come out all day. The greatness of the heart of your mercy already
is well declared: no brave fighter, as far as I can reach, is
Forced to do more than defy his enemy and wait for him in the field; what about if He
On the contrary, he does not go, infamy remains in him, and the expectant wins the
maturity crown.
`` That is true, '' replied Don Quixote, `` close the door, my friend, and give me
by testimony, in the best way you can, what you have seen me here
do; It is convenient to know: how you opened the lion, I waited for him, he did not
he left; I waited for him again, he did not come out again and went back to bed. I do not owe
more, and charms outside, and God help reason and truth, and
true cavalry; and closes, as I said, as I wave to
the fled and absent, so that they know this feat from your mouth.
The lion man did so, and Don Quixote, putting on the tip of the spear the
canvas with which he had wiped his face from the curd rain,
began to call those who did not stop fleeing or turning their heads to each
I pass, all in troops and in front of the hidalgo; but, reaching Sancho to
see the sign of the white cloth, said:
"Let them kill me if my lord has not defeated the fierce beasts, for we
call.
They all stopped and learned that the one who made the signs was Don
Quixote; and, losing some part of their fear, little by little they came
approaching where they clearly heard the voices of Don Quixote, that the
called. Finally, they returned to the cart, and as they arrived, Don Quixote said
to the carter:
"Come back, brother, to unite your mules and to continue your journey; and you,
Sancho, give him two gold shields, for him and for the lion, as a reward
of what they have stopped for me.
"I will give those very willingly," answered Sancho; but what have been done
the Lions? Are they dead or alive?
Then the lion man, briefly and by his pauses, told the end of the
conflict, exaggerating, as best he could and knew, the value of Don Quixote,
from whose sight the lion, cowering, did not want or dare to leave the cage,
since the cage door had been wide open; and
that, because he had told that gentleman that it was tempting God to irritate the
lion so that by force he would come out, as he wanted him to be irritated, badly
Degree and against all his will, he had allowed the door to close.
-What do you think of this, Sancho? said Don Quixote. Are there charms worth
against true bravery? Well may the enchanters take away my
good fortune, but effort and courage will be impossible.
Sancho gave the shields, the carter anointed, the lion man kissed the hands of Don
Quixote for the mercy he received, and promised to tell him that brave
feat to the king himself, when he was seen at court.
-Well, if His Majesty asks who made it, you will tell him that the
Knight of the Lions, that from here on I want this one to be
barter, change, return and change the one that I have had of the Knight of
the Sad Figure; and in this I follow the old way of the andantes
gentlemen, who changed their names when they wanted, or when I came to
story.
The car continued on its way, and Don Quixote, Sancho, and the one in the Green Gabán
they continued theirs.
In all this time, Don Diego de Miranda had not spoken a word, all
attentive to looking at and noticing the deeds and words of Don Quixote, seeming to him
that he was a sane madman and a madman who pulled sane. Had not yet arrived
to your news the first part of your story; that if I had read it,
the admiration in which his deeds and words put him would cease, since
knew the genre of his madness; but, since I did not know it, I already considered him
sane and already crazy, because what he spoke was concerted, elegant and well
said, and what he did, crazy, reckless and foolish. And he said to each other:
-What more madness could it be than to put on a headpiece full of cottage cheese and
hint that charmers softened his hooves? And that
greater recklessness and nonsense than wanting to fight by force with lions?
Don Quixote brought out these imaginations and this soliloquy, saying:
- Who doubts, Mr. Don Diego de Miranda, that your grace does not have me in
your opinion for a crazy and crazy man? And it wouldn't be much that way
it was, because my works cannot bear witness to anything else. Because with
all this, I want your grace to warn that I am not so crazy or so
dwindled as I must have seemed. He seems like a gallant gentleman,
in the eyes of their king, in the middle of a great square, to throw a
happy event to a brave bull; he looks like a gentleman, armed with
shining weapons, pass the cloth in joyous jousts before the
ladies, and it seems all those gentlemen who in exercises
military, or look like it, entertain and cheer, and, if it can be said,
they honor the courts of their princes; but above all these seems better a
knight errant, who through the deserts, through the solitudes, through the
crossroads, in the jungles and in the mountains, he is looking for dangerous
adventures, with the intention of giving them a happy and very fortunate summit, just for
achieve glorious and lasting fame. It better seems, I say, a gentleman
errant, helping a widow in some deserted place, that a courtier
knight, demanding a maiden in the cities. All the gentlemen
they have their particular exercises: let the courtier serve the ladies;
authorize the court of your king with liveries; sustain the poor knights with
the splendid plate on your table; schedule jousts, hold tournaments and
show yourself great, liberal and magnificent, and a good Christian, above all, and
In this way it will fulfill its precise obligations. But the errant
gentleman look for the corners of the world; enter the most intricate
labyrinths; undertake the impossible at every step; stand on the moors
the fiery rays of the sun in the middle of summer, and in the
winter the harsh inclemency of the winds and the yelos; don't be surprised
lions, do not scare away vestiges, or scare endriams; what to look for
these, attacking those and defeating them all are his main and
real exercises. I, then, how lucky I was to be one of the number
of the errant cavalry, I cannot help but undertake everything that
It seems to me that it falls below the jurisdiction of my exercises; and so, the
attack the lions that I now attacked rightly touched me, since
I knew to be reckless isorbitant, because I well know what courage is, which is
a virtue that is placed between two we are vicious, as are the
cowardice and recklessness; but luckily it will be that the one who is brave touches and
go up to the point of recklessness, don't let it go down and play at the point of cowardly;
that just as it is easier for the prodigal to come to be liberal than for the miser, so
it is easier to turn the reckless into true brave than not the coward to climb
to true courage; and, when it comes to undertaking adventures, believe me
Thank you, Señor Don Diego, who must first be lost by letter of more than
less, because it sounds better in the ears of those who hear it.
gentleman is reckless and daring "no" this gentleman is shy and
Coward".
`` I say, Señor Don Quixote, '' answered Don Diego, `` that everything that you
Grace has said and done is leveled with the faithful of the same reason, and that
I understand that if the ordinances and laws of cavalry errant are
lost, they would be found in your mercy's chest as in his own
deposit and file. And let's hurry, it's getting late, and let's get to me
village and house, where your mercy will rest from past work, that if not
It has been of the body, it has been of the spirit, which may perhaps redound to
tiredness of the body.
-I have the offer in great favor and mercy, Mr. Don Diego- he replied
Don Quixote.
And, itching more than until then, it would be like two in the afternoon
when they reached the village and the house of Don Diego, whom Don Quixote
called the Knight of the Green Overcoat.
Chapter XVIII. Of what happened to Don Quixote in the castle or house of the
Knight of the Green Overcoat, with other extravagant things
Don Quixote found to be the house of Don Diego de Miranda as wide as a village;
the weapons, however, although of rough stone, above the door to the street;
the cellar, in the patio; the cave, in the portal, and many jars to the
round, which, being from Toboso, renewed the memories of his enchanted
and transformed Dulcinea; and sighing, and without looking at what he said, nor in front
Whose it was, said:
-O sweet garments, for my badly found,
sweet and happy when God wanted!
Oh slimy jars, which have reminded me of the sweet garment
of my greatest bitterness!
The student poet, the son of Don Diego, heard him say this, who with his mother
had come out to receive him, and mother and son were suspended from seeing the
strange figure of Don Quixote; who, getting off from Rocinante, went with
much courtesy to ask for his hands to kiss them, and Don Diego said:
"Welcome, madam, with your sole pleasure to Mr. Don Quixote de la
Mancha, which is the one in front of you, errant knight and the bravest and
the most discreet in the world.
The lady, whose name was Dona Cristina, received him with samples of much
love and much courtesy, and Don Quixote offered himself with such discreet
and restrained reasons. Almost the same remarks happened with the student,
that, when Don Quixote heard him speak, he thought he was discreet and sharp.
Here the author paints all the circumstances of Don Diego's house,
painting in them what contains a house of a peasant gentleman and
rich; but to the translator this story seemed to pass these and others
such trifles in silence, because they did not suit the purpose
main story, which has its strength more in the truth than in
the cold digressions.
They entered Don Quixote into a room, Sancho disarmed him, remained in Walloons and
camouflage doublet, all coupled with the filth of the weapons: the neck was
Walloon to the student, without starch and without randas; the boots were
dated, and shoes waxed. He girded on his good sword, which hung from
a baldric of sea lions; which is the opinion that many years he was ill with
the kidneys; he covered a blue tit with a good brown cloth; but first of all,
with five cauldrons, or six, of water, which in the number of cauldrons there are
some difference, he washed his head and face, and the water still remained
colored serum, thanks to Sancho's candy and the purchase of his
black cottage cheese, how white they made their master. With referrals
dressed, and with gentle grace and gallantry, Don Quixote went out to another room,
where the student was waiting to entertain him while the
tables were set; that, by the coming of such a noble guest, the lady wanted
doña Cristina show that she knew and could give to those who at her house
arrived.
While Don Quixote was disarming, Don Lorenzo took place, who
that's what Don Diego's son was called, after saying to his father:
Who can we say, sir, that this gentleman is that your grace has
brought home? That the name, the figure, and the saying that he is a gentleman
Andante, he has me and my mother suspended.
"I don't know what I'm telling you, son," replied Don Diego; I will only know how to say that
I have seen him do things of the greatest madman in the world, and say reasons so
discreet that erase and undo their facts: speak to him, and take the pulse of
what he knows, and, since you are discreet, judge by his discretion or foolishness what
that more put in reason; although, to tell the truth, before
I think it is crazy than sane.
With this, Don Lorenzo went to entertain Don Quixote, as has been said,
and, among other talks that the two passed, Don Quixote said to Don
Lawrence:
-Mr. Don Diego de Miranda, father of your mercy, has given me news
of the rare skill and subtle wit that your grace has, and, above all,
all that is your mercy a great poet.
`` Poet, it may well be, '' answered Don Lorenzo, `` but great, not even
thought. It is true that I am somewhat fond of poetry already
read the good poets, but not in such a way as to give me the name of
great my father says.
"That humility does not seem bad to me," replied Don Quixote, "because there is no poet
Let him not be arrogant and think of himself that he is the greatest poet in the world.
`` There is no rule without exception, '' answered Don Lorenzo, `` and some will have to do it.
let it be and don't think about it.
"Few," answered Don Quixote; but tell me your mercy: what verses are
those that he now has in his hands, that the lord his father has told me that he
bring something restless and pensive? And if it is a gloss, it is understood to me
some ailment of glosses, and I'd be glad to know; and if they are fair
literary, may your grace take the second prize, that the first
always takes the favor or the great quality of the person, the second is
brings mere justice, and the third becomes second, and the first, to
this account will be the third, in the manner of the licenses given in the
universities; but, with all this, great character is the name of the first.
"Until now," Don Lorenzo said among himself, "I will not be able to judge you as crazy;
let's go ahead.
And he said:
- It seems to me that your grace has attended the schools: what sciences have you heard?
`` That of the cavalry errant, '' answered Don Quixote, `` which is as good as
that of poetry, and even two more fingers.
`` I don't know what science that is, '' replied Don Lorenzo, `` and so far it has not
come to my news.
`` It is a science, '' replied Don Quixote, `` that contains in itself all or the most
sciences of the world, because the one who professes it must be a jurist, and
know the laws of distributive and commutative justice, to give each
one what is his and what is convenient for him; He has to be a theologian, to know how to give
reason of the Christian law that professes, clearly and distinctly, wherever
that it was asked; must be a doctor and mainly a herbalist, to
know in the middle of the depopulated and deserts the herbs that have
virtue of healing wounds, that the knight-errant must not walk at each
triquete looking for someone to cure them; must be an astrologer, to know by
the stars how many hours are spent at night, and in what part and in
what climate of the world is found; must know mathematics, because each
step will be offered to have need of them; and, leaving aside that it has to
be adorned with all the theological and cardinal virtues, descending to
other trifles, I say that he must know how to swim as they say the fish swam
Nicolás or Nicolao; He must know how to shoe a horse and dress the saddle and the
Brake; and, returning to what is above, he has to keep faith in God and his lady;
must be chaste in thoughts, honest in words, liberal in
works, brave in deeds, long-suffering in works, charitable with
the needy, and, finally, maintainer of the truth, even if it costs him
life defending it. Of all these great and minimal parts it is composed
a good knight-errant; because see your grace, Mr. Don Lorenzo, yes
It is brat science what the gentleman who studies and professes it learns,
and if it can be equaled to the most stretched out in gyms and schools,
teach.
`` If that is so, '' replied Don Lorenzo, `` I say that science has an advantage over
all.
-How is it so? Don Quixote answered.
What I want to say, said Don Lorenzo, is that I doubt that there was
that there are now, knights errant and adorned with so many virtues.
"Many times I have said what I am saying now," replied Don Quixote:
that most of the world's people are of the opinion that they have not
there have been knights errant in it; and, because it seems to me that if heaven
miraculously does not give them to understand the truth that there were and that the
there is, any work you take has to be in vain, as I often do
experience has shown, I do not want to stop now to take your
at the mercy of the error that he has with the many; what I plan to do is beg
I took heaven out of him, and let him understand how profitable and how
necessary were the knights errant to the world in the past centuries, and
how useful they would be in the present if used; but they succeed now, for
sins of the people, laziness, idleness, gluttony and the gift.
`` Our guest has escaped from us, '' said Don
Lorenzo-, but, with all that, he is crazy bizarre, and I would be foolish
lazy if you don't think so.
Here they ended their talk, because they were called to eat. Asked don
Diego to his son what he had gotten out of the guest's ingenuity. To what
which he replied:
- How many doctors and good
scribes has the world: he is a streaky madman, full of lucid
intervals.
They went to eat, and the meal was just as Don Diego had said in the
the path that he used to give to his guests: clean, abundant and tasty; but
What Don Quixote was most content with was the marvelous silence that
The whole house was, which resembled a Carthusian monastery. Raised up,
well, the tablecloths, and thanking God and water to the hands, gift
Quixote earnestly asked Don Lorenzo to say the verses of the joust
literary; to which he replied that, because he did not seem like one of those poets who
when they beg them to say their verses they deny them and when they do not ask them
vomit, ...
-... I will say my gloss, from which I do not expect any prize, that only for
exercise the wit I have done.
`` A discreet friend, '' answered Don Quixote, `` it seemed that he had not
to tire anyone in glossing verses; and the reason, he said, was that he never
glosa could reach the text, and that many or more times the gloss would go
out of the intention and purpose of what was requested what was glossed; and more,
that the laws of the gloss were too narrow: that they did not suffer
questions, neither said, nor will I say, nor make nouns of verbs, nor change the
sense, with other ties and straits with which those who
they gloss, as your grace must know.
`` Truly, Senor Don Quixote, '' said Don Lorenzo, `` I wish to take
your mercy in a continued bad Latin, and I cannot, because it slips
out of your hands like an eel.
`` I do not understand, '' answered Don Quixote, `` what your grace says or wants.
say in that of slipping.
"I will make myself understood," answered Don Lorenzo; and for now be vuesa
Attentive to the glossed verses and the gloss, which say in this way:
If my was turned to is,
without waiting any longer it will be,
or the time would come
of what will be after ...!
Gloss
At last, as everything happens,
the good that it gave me passed
Fortune, a time not scarce,
and it never came back to me,
neither abundant, nor by rate.
Centuries have you seen me,
Fortune, laid at your feet;
make me happy again,
what will be my happy being
if my was, turn to is.
I don't want another taste or glory
another palm or expiration,
another triumph, another victory,
but to return to the content
which is weighing on my memory.
If you return me there,
Fortuna, it's tempered
all the rigor of my fire,
and more if it's okay later,
without waiting any longer it will be.
Impossible things I ask,
then return time to be
after once has been,
there is no power on earth
that it has been extended to so long.
Time runs, flies and goes
light, and will not return,
and he who asks would err,
or that time is already gone,
or the time came back now.
I live in a perplexed life
already waiting, already fearing:
it is a well-known death,
and it's much better dying
look for a way out of pain.
I was interested
finish, but it is not,
well, with better speech,
life gives me fear
of what will be after.
As Don Lorenzo finished saying his gloss, Don Quixote got up,
and, in a raised voice, which seemed to cry, grasping with his hand the right of
Don Lorenzo, said:
-The heavens live where they are highest, generous young man, you are the
best poet in the world, and that you deserve to be honored, not by Cyprus nor by
Gaeta, as a poet said, God forgive, but by the academies of
Athens, if they lived today, and by those who live today in Paris, Bologna and
Salamanca! Pray to heaven that the judges who will take the prize from you first,
Phoebus the asaetee and the Muses never cross the threshold of their houses.
Tell me, sir, if you are served, some major verses, that I want to take
of everything in all the pulse to your admirable wit.
Isn't it good that they say that Don Lorenzo was delighted to see himself praised by Don
Quixote, even though you thought him crazy? Oh force of flattery, how much do you
you stretch, and how wide are the limits of your agreeable jurisdiction!
This truth was accredited by Don Lorenzo, since he granted with the demand and desire of
Don Quixote, telling this sonnet to the fable or story of Pyramus and
Thisbe:
Sonnet
The wall breaks the beautiful maiden
that of Pyramus opened the gallant chest:
the love of cyprus leaves, and it goes straight
to see the narrow and prodigious bankruptcy.
The silence speaks there, because it does not dare
the voice entering through such a narrow strait;
the souls yes, that love usually in fact
facilitate the most difficult thing.
The desire for compass came out, and the step
of the reckless virgin requests
for his pleasure his death; see what story:
that both at one point, oh strange case!
kills them, covers them up and resurrects
a sword, a grave, a memory.
"Blessed be God!" -said Don Quixote, having heard Don Quixote's sonnet
Lorenzo-, that among the infinite consumed poets out there, I have seen a
consummate poet, as is your grace, my lord; that is how he gives it to me
understand the artifice of this sonnet.
For four days Don Quixote was extremely gifted in Don Diego's house, at the
end of which he asked permission to leave, saying that he thanked him
the mercy and good treatment that he had received at home; but what, why
It does not seem right that knights errant spend long hours at leisure and
gift, he wanted to go to fulfill his trade, looking for adventures,
who had news that that land abounded, where he hoped to entertain
the time until the day of the jousts of Zaragoza arrived, which was
his right defeat; and that first he had to enter the cave of
Montesinos, of whom so many and so admirable things in those surroundings were
counted, knowing and inquiring also the birth and true
springs of the seven lagoons commonly called Ruidera.
Don Diego and his son praised him for his honorable determination, and told him that
take from his house and his estate all that would come to him in degree, that
they would serve with the will possible; that the value of their
person and his honorable profession.
Finally, the day of his departure arrived, as happy for Don Quixote as
sad and unfortunate for Sancho Panza, who was very well with the
abundance from Don Diego's house, and refused to return to the hunger that
used in the forests, unpopulated, and the narrowness of its poorly supplied
saddlebags. With all this, he filled them and filled them with the most necessary that
it seemed; and when he said goodbye, Don Quixote said to Don Lorenzo:
-I do not know if I have said to your mercy again, and if I have said it I will
say, that when your grace wants to save roads and jobs for
reach the unapproachable summit of the Temple of Fame, you don't have to
another thing but to leave aside the path of poetry, somewhat narrow, and
take the very narrow of the errant cavalry, enough to make him
emperor daca straws.
With these reasons, Don Quixote ended up closing the process of his madness, and
more with which he added, saying:
-God knows if I wanted to take Mr. Lorenzo with me, to teach him
how the subjects are to be forgiven, and the arrogant subordinate and embraced,
virtues attached to the profession that I profess; but, well, your
little age, nor will they want to indulge his praiseworthy exercises, I am only happy
to warn your mercy that, being a poet, he can be famous if he
He is guided more by the opinion of others than by his own, because there is no father or
mother to whom her children seem ugly, and in those who are of the
understanding runs more this deception.
Father and son again admired the meddling reasons of Don
Quixote, already discreet and already crazy, and the theme and tenacity that
go all in all in search of their unfortunate adventures, which
he had at last and target of his desires. The offers were reiterated and
restraints, and, with the good license of the lady of the castle, Mr.
Quixote and Sancho, on Rocinante and the rucio, parted.
Chapter XIX. Where the adventure of the shepherd in love is told, with others
really funny events
Don Quixote had elongated a short distance from Don Diego's place, when
met with two as clergymen or as students and with two farmers who
on four donkey beasts came knights. The one of the students
brought, as in a portamanteo, in a cloth of green bocací wrapped, to the
apparently, a little white scarlet and two pairs of cordellate stockings; the
another brought nothing but two black fencing swords, new, and with
his slippers. The farmers brought other things, which gave an indication and
sign that they came from some large villa, where they had bought them, and the
they took to their village; and so students and farmers fell into the same
admiration in which all those who saw Don for the first time fell
Quixote, and they were dying to know what man that was so out of the ordinary
other men.
Don Quixote greeted them, and, after knowing the path they were leading, which was
the same as he did, he offered them his company, and asked them to stop the
step, because his colts walked more than his horse; and, to force them,
In brief reasons he told them who he was, and his trade and profession, which was from
knight errant who went to seek adventures in all parts of the
world. He told them that his own name was Don Quixote de la Mancha, and
by the appellative, the Knight of the Lions. All this for the Labradors
was to speak to them in Greek or gibberish, but not for the students, who
then they understood the weakness of Don Quixote's brain; but, with everything
That, they looked at him with admiration and respect, and one of them said:
-If your grace, sir knight, does not have a determined path, of course
those who seek adventure usually take him, your mercy takes revenge with
us: you will see one of the best and richest weddings than to this day
They will have been celebrated in La Mancha, or in many other leagues around.
Don Quixote asked him if they belonged to a prince, who thus pondered them.
`` They are not, '' replied the student, `` but of a farmer and a female farmer: he,
the richest in all this land; and she, the most beautiful that the
mens. The apparatus with which they are to be made is extraordinary and new,
because they have to be celebrated in a meadow that is next to the bride's town,
who par excellence is called Quiteria the beautiful, and the bridegroom is called
Camacho the rich; she was eighteen years old, and he was twenty-two;
both stop at one, although some curious who have by heart the
lineages from all over the world mean that that of the beautiful Quiteria is
it surpasses that of Camacho; but you no longer look at this, that riches are
powerful to weld many breaks. Indeed, this Camacho is liberal and
he has wanted to frame and cover the entire meadow above, in such a way
that the sun has to be seen at work if you want to visit the herbs
green of which the ground is covered. He also has different dances, like this
of swords like a small rattlesnake, that there is in his town who rings them
and shake it out; of shoemakers I do not say anything, which is a judgment
that has stubborn; but none of the things referred to nor many others that
I have stopped referring has to make these weddings more memorable, but those that
I imagine that the jilted Basilio will do in them. Is this Basilio a boy
neighbor of the same place of Quiteria, which had his house a wall and a half of
that of the parents of Quiteria, from which the love of renewing the
world the already forgotten loves of Pyramus and Thisbe, because Basilio fell in love
of Quiteria since her tender and early years, and she was corresponding to
his wish with a thousand honest favors, so much so that they
entertainment in the village the loves of the two children Basilio and
Quiteria. Age grew, and Quiteria's father agreed to interfere with
to Basilio the ordinary entrance that he had in his house; and, to get rid of
suspicious and suspicious, he ordered to marry his daughter to the rich man
Camacho, not seeming to be good to marry her with Basilio, who did not have so many
goods of fortune as well as of nature; Well, if you are going to tell the truths without
invidia, he is the most agile young man we know: great barbell shooter,
wrestler and great ball player; run like a deer, jump more
than a goat and swipe it at bowling as if by enchantment; sing like a
calender, and plays a guitar, which makes her speak, and, above all, plays
a sword like the most painted.
`` By that grace alone, '' said Don Quixote at this time, `` that young man deserved
not only marry beautiful Quiteria, but Queen Guinevere herself,
if it were alive today, despite Lanzarote and all those who hinder it
would like.
-To my wife with that! -said Sancho Panza, who until then had gone
shutting up and listening-, which wants only for each one to marry his
the same, adhering to the saying that they say "each sheep with its partner." What
I would like that that good Basilio, who I am already becoming fond of,
marry that lady Quiteria; What a good century and good ground, I was going to
to say the other way around, those who interfere with getting married, those who love each other well.
"If all those who love each other had gotten married," said Don Quixote,
the choice and jurisdiction of parents to marry their children with
who and when they should; and if the daughters will choose the
husbands, such he should choose his father's servant, and such he saw
passing through the street, in his opinion, bizarre and intoned, even if it was a
disrupted swordsman; that love and hobby easily blind the
eyes of understanding, so necessary to choose state, and that of the
marriage is very in danger of being erred, and great care and
particular favor of heaven to hit him. You want to take a long trip
And if you are prudent, before setting out, look for a safe company and
gentle with whom to accompany; Well, why won't he who has done the same
to walk all your life, to the whereabouts of death, and more if the
company has to accompany you in bed, at the table and everywhere, as
is that of the woman with her husband? The woman's own is not merchandise that
once bought it is returned, or exchanged or exchanged, because it is an accident
inseparable, which lasts as long as life lasts: it is a bond that if once
throw around the neck, it turns into the Gordian knot, which if it does not cut the
scythe of death, there is no unleashing him. Many more things I could say in
this matter, if it is not hindered by the desire I have to know if it is
more to tell the graduate about the history of Basilio.
To which the high school student responded, or graduate, as Don called him
Quixote, that:
-All that remains for me to say but from the point that Basilio knew
that the beautiful Quiteria was marrying the rich Camacho, they have never
seen laugh or speak concerted reason, and he is always thoughtful and sad,
talking to himself, with which he gives certain and clear signals that he is
his judgment has returned: he eats little and sleeps little, and what he eats is fruit, and
where he sleeps, if he sleeps, it is in the field, on the hard earth, like
raw animal; look from time to time to the sky, and other times nails
eyes on the ground, with such rapture that it seems nothing but a statue
dressed that the air moves her clothes. Anyway, he shows such signs of having
passionate heart, that all of us who know him fear that giving the
yes tomorrow the beautiful Quiteria has to be the sentence of his death.
"God will do better," said Sancho; that God, who gives the wound, gives the
medicine; nobody knows what is to come: from now until tomorrow many hours
there is, and in one, and even in a moment, the house falls; I have seen it rain and
sunshine, all at the same point; such the night goes to bed healthy, that I do not know
can move another day. And tell me, by chance will there be someone who praises himself
Have you nailed the slice of Fortune? No, by the way; and between the
yes and no of the woman I would not dare to put a pin point,
because it wouldn't fit. Give me that Quiteria wants with a good heart and good
will to Basilio, that I will give him a sack of good fortune: that the
love, as i have heard, look with some cravings that make it look like gold
to copper, to poverty, wealth, and to lagaña pearls.
-Where are you going to stop, Sancho, that you're cursed? said Don Quixote; that
When you start stringing sayings and stories, you can only wait for the
Judas himself, let him take you. Tell me, animal, what do you know about nails or
slices, or anything else?
-Oh! Well, if you don't understand me, 'answered Sancho,' it's no wonder that my
sentences are considered nonsense. But it doesn't matter: I understand myself, and
I know that I have not said many foolish things in what I have said; but you
Grace, my lord, it is always friscal of my sayings, and even of my deeds.
`` Prosecutor, you have to say, '' said Don Quixote, `` that no friscal, prevaricator of the
good language, God confuse you.
-Don't point your mercy with me -answered Sancho-, because you know that
I have grown up in the Court, nor have I studied in Salamanca, to find out if I add
or remove some letter from my words. Yes, what, God help me, there is no for
what to force the sayagués to speak like the toledano, and toledanos can
They must not be cut in the air in this polite speech.
`` That's right, '' said the lawyer, `` because those who know cannot speak so well.
They breed in the Tanneries and in Zocodover like the ones that walk almost all the
day by the cloister of the Iglesia Mayor, and all are from Toledo. The language
pure, his own, the elegant and clear, is in the discreet courtiers,
Although they were born in Majalahonda: I said discreet because there are many who do not
they are, and discretion is the grammar of good language, which is accompanied
with the use. I, gentlemen, for my sins, have studied Canons in
Salamanca, and take some time to say my reason with clear words,
plain and significant.
-If you don't bite yourself more to know more to wiggle the black ones you wear than the
language -said the other student-, you will take the first in licenses,
How did you wear a tail?
`` Look, bachelor, '' replied the graduate, `` you are in the most wrong
opinion of the world about the skill of the sword, taking it for vain.
"For me it is not an opinion, but an established truth," replied Corchuelo; what if
you want me to show you with experience, swords you bring, comfort
there are, I have pulses and forces, that accompanied by my spirit, which is not
little, they will make you confess that I am not mistaken. Get off, and use your
compass of feet, of your circles and your angles and science; that I
I hope to make you see stars at noon with my modern and crude dexterity,
in whom I hope, after God, that a man is about to be born who will make me
turn your back, and that there is no one in the world to whom I do not
lose land.
"I don't get my backs about going back, or not," replied the right-hander;
although it could be that in the part where the first time you put your foot,
there they opened the grave for you: I mean that there you remain dead for
the despised skill.
"Now we'll see," Corchuelo answered.
And, dismounting with great alacrity from his donkey, he tugged furiously at one of the
swords that the graduate carried in his.
`` It must not be like that, '' said Don Quixote at this moment, `` that I want to be the
master of this fencing, and the judge of this many times has not inquired about the question.
And, getting off Rocinante and seizing his spear, he stood in the middle of the
way, in time that the graduate, with gentle grace of body and
compass of feet, he went against Corchuelo, who came against him, throwing,
as they say, fire through the eyes. The other two Labradors of the
accompaniment, without alighting from their colts, served as aspetators in the
deadly tragedy. The stabs, lunges, ups and downs, setbacks and jabs
that Corchuelo threw were without number, thicker than liver and smaller
what hail. He lunged like an angry lion, but a
mask of the bachelor's sword slipper, which in the middle of his
fury stopped him, and made him kiss it as if it were a relic, although not with
as much devotion as relics should and are often kissed.
Finally, the graduate counted all the buttons on a
half cassock that she was wearing, making her skirts strip, like
octopus tails; knocked down his hat twice, and tired him so that
spite, rage, and rage seized the sword by the hilt, and threw it
the air with such force that one of the assistant farmers, who was
Scribe, who went for her, later gave as a testimony that he stretched her of himself
almost three quarters of a league; which testimony serves and has served so that
let it be known and truly see how force is overcome by art.
Corchuelo sat down tired, and Sancho coming to him, said:
-My faith, Mr. Bachelor, if your grace take my advice, from here on
He must not challenge anyone to fencing, but to fight or to throw the bar,
Well, he has the age and strength for it; What of these who are called right-handed?
I have heard that they put a point of a sword through the eye of a needle.
"I am glad," Corchuelo replied, "that I fell from my donkey, and that
experience has shown me the truth, from whom I was so far away.
And, getting up, he embraced the lawyer, and there were more friends than before,
and not wanting to wait for the clerk, who had gone to the sword, for
seem to him that it would take a long time; and thus, they determined to continue, to arrive
early to the village of Quiteria, where they were all from.
In what was left of the road, the lawyer was telling them the
excellences of the sword, with so many demonstrative reasons and with so many
figures and mathematical proofs, that everyone was aware of the
goodness of science, and Corchuelo reduced from his stubbornness.
It was dusk, but before they arrived it seemed to all that it was
in front of the people a sky full of innumerable and resplendent
stars. They also heard confused and soft sounds of various
instruments, such as flutes, tambourines, psalteries, albogues, tambourines and
rattles; and when they got close they saw that the trees of a bower,
that they had placed by hand at the entrance of the town, they were all full of
luminaries, who were not offended by the wind, which then blew only as
meek who had no strength to move the leaves of the trees. The musicians
were the rejoicing of the wedding, who in various gangs by that
nice place they walked, some dancing, and others singing, and others playing
the diversity of the aforementioned instruments. Indeed, it seemed only
joy was running throughout that meadow and contentment leaping.
Many others were busy erecting scaffolding, whence comfortably
could see another day the performances and dances that were to be done
in that place dedicated to solenizing the weddings of the rich Camacho and the
Basilio's funeral. Don Quixote did not want to enter the place, although he
Thus they asked the farmer as well as the bachelor; but he apologized,
quite a lot in his opinion, it is the custom of knights errant to sleep
through the fields and forests before in the villages, even if it was below
of gilded ceilings; and with this, he deviated a bit from the path, well against the
Sancho's will, coming to mind the good accommodation that had
had in the castle or house of Don Diego.
Chapter XX. Where the weddings of Camacho the rich are told, with the event
from Basilio the poor
Scarcely had the white dawn given rise to the shining Phoebus, with the
burning of her hot rays, the liquid pearls of her golden hair
wore off, when Don Quixote, shaking the laziness of his limbs,
He stood up and called for his squire Sancho, who was still snoring; which seen
for Don Quixote, before he woke him up, he said:
-Oh you, blessed on all who live on the face of the earth,
without being invidious or invidious, you sleep with a calm spirit, nor do you
they chase enchanters, nor do they startle enchantments! Sleep, I say another
time, and I will say it another hundred, without being kept in constant vigil by jealousy of
your lady, do not give you thoughts of paying debts that you owe, or
What do you and your distressed little family have to do to eat another day?
Neither ambition disturbs you, nor the vain pomp of the world weary you, for
limits of your desires do not extend to more than to think your ass; that he
of your person on my shoulders you have him put: counterweight and load that
He put nature and custom to the lords. The servant sleeps, and is
watching over the Lord, thinking how he will sustain, improve and make
Mercedes. The anguish of seeing that the sky is made of bronze without going to the
earth with the suitable dew does not afflict the servant, but the lord, who has
to sustain in sterility and hunger the one who served him in fertility and
abundance.
Sancho did not respond to all this, because he was sleeping, nor would he wake up so quickly if
Don Quixote with the tale of the spear will not make him come to himself. Woke up,
in short, sleepy and lazy, and, turning his face everywhere, he said:
-From the part of this bower, if I am not mistaken, there is a stink and smell much more
of roasted torreznos than of reeds and thyme: weddings that due to such smells
they begin, for my santiguada that they must be abundant and generous.
"Finish it, glutton," said Don Quixote; come, we will go to see these betrothal, for
see what the scorned Basilio does.
-More than he does what he wants -answered Sancho-: he was not poor and
marry Quiteria. Is there nothing else but to have a room and want to rise
In the clouds? By faith, sir, I am of the opinion that the poor must
be content with what I find, and not ask for popcorn in the gulf. I will bet
an arm that Camacho can wrap Basilio in reales; and if this is so,
as it should be, Quiteria was very silly to discard the finery and
jewels that he must have given him, and Camacho can give him, for choosing the
pulling the bar and playing Basilio's black. About a good shot of
bar or on a gentle sword trick they do not give a pint of wine in the
tavern. Skills and graces that are not salable, unless the person has them
Count Dirlos; but, when such graces fall on those who have good
money, such is my life as they seem. On a good foundation you can
build a good building, and the best foundation and trench in the world is the
money.
`` Because of who God is, Sancho, '' Don Quixote said at this time, `` that you conclude
with your harangue; that I have for me that if they let you continue in which each
step you begin, you would not have time to eat or sleep, that everything
you would spend him talking.
`` If your grace had a good memory, '' replied Sancho, `` you should
remember the chapters of our concert before this last time
Let's leave the house: one of them was that he had to let me talk everything
whatever he wanted, as long as it was not against his neighbor or against
authority of your mercy; and until now it seems to me that I have not contravened
against such chapter.
"I don't remember, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "of that chapter; and,
since it is so, I want you to shut up and come, that the instruments that
Last night we heard the valleys rejoice again, and undoubtedly the betrothal
they will celebrate in the cool of the morning, and not in the heat of the afternoon.
Sancho did what his lord commanded him, and, putting the chair to Rocinante and
the pack to the roe, the two climbed, and step by step they entered
by the bower.
The first thing that was offered to Sancho's sight was, snapped in a
spit of a whole elm, a whole steer; and in the fire where there was
roasting a medium mound of firewood burned, and six pots that around the
bonfire were not made in the common turquoise of the other pots,
because there were six half jars, each containing a trace of meat: thus
they soaked up and enclosed whole rams, without looking at each other, as if
they were palominos; the hares already without skin and the chickens without feathers that
they were hung by the trees to bury them in the pots they had no
number; the birds and game of various kinds were infinite, hung from
trees for the air to cool them.
Sancho counted more than sixty zaques of more than two arrobas each, and
all full, as it later seemed, with generous wines; so there were rimeros
of very white bread, as there are usually heaps of wheat in the ages;
the cheeses, laid like latticed bricks, formed a wall, and two
oil boilers, larger than those of a dye, served to fry things of
dough, which with two brave shovels they took them out fried and dipped them in
another cauldron of prepared honey that was there next to.
There were more than fifty cooks and cooks: all clean, all
diligent and everyone happy. In the bulge's dilated belly were
twelve tender little piglets, which, sewn on top, served to give
taste and tenderize you. Spices of various kinds did not appear to be
bought by the pound, but by the arrobas, and they were all displayed in a
great ark. Finally, the wedding apparatus was rustic, but so
abundant that could sustain an army.
Sancho Panza looked at everything, and contemplated everything, and everything
he was fond of: first the pots captivated him and gave up his desire, whose
he will take very nice wins a medium pot; then he was fond of the
will the zaques; and, lately, skillet fruits, if they are
the plump kettles could be called pans; and thus, without being able to suffer
nor be it in his hand to do anything else, he came to one of the solicitous
cooks, and, with polite and hungry reasons, begged him to let him wet
a crust of bread in one of those pots. To which the cook
answered:
-Brother, this day is not one of those over whom the
hunger, thanks to the rich Camacho. Get down and see if there's a ladle out there
and froth a chicken or two, and enjoy yourselves.
"I don't see any," answered Sancho.
"Wait," said the cook. Sinner of me, and how finicky and for little
you must be!
And, saying this, he took hold of a cauldron, and, fitting it into one of the stockings
jars, he brought out three hens and two geese, and said to Sancho:
-Eat, friend, and have breakfast with this foam, while the time comes
of the yantar.
"I don't have anything to do with it," answered Sancho.
`` Well, take, '' said the cook, `` the spoon and everything, that wealth and
happy with Camacho he supplies everything.
While this was happening, Sancho, Don Quixote was watching how,
through one part of the bower, up to twelve peasants out of twelve entered
very beautiful mares, with rich and showy country harnesses and with many
bells in the petrales, and all dressed for rejoicing and festivals; the
which, in concerted flock, ran not one, but many races through the
meadow, with rejoicing will cheer and shout, saying:
- Long live Camacho and Quiteria: he is as rich as she is beautiful, and she is the
beautiful of the world!
Hearing this, Don Quixote said among himself:
-It seems that these have not seen my Dulcinea del Toboso, that if
had seen, they went hand in hand in the praises of their
Quiteria.
From there little by little they began to enter various parts of the bower
many and different dances, including one of swords, up to
twenty-four boys of gallant appearance and verve, all dressed in
thin and very white canvas, with its playing cloths, carved in various
colors of fine silk; and the one who led them, who was a slight young man,
asked one of the mares if any of the mares had been injured.
dancers.
-For now, bless God, no one has been injured: we are all healthy.
And then he began to get tangled up with the other companions, with so many twists and turns
with such dexterity that, although Don Quixote was made to see such
Dances, none of them had seemed as good as this one.
He also liked another who came in with very beautiful maidens, so young
that, apparently, no one was less than fourteen or eighteen years old,
all dressed in green palmilla, their hair part braided and part
loose, but all so blond, that with the sun they could have
competition, on which they brought garlands of jasmine, roses,
compound amaranth and honeysuckle. They were led by a venerable old man and a
elderly matron, but lighter and looser than her years promised.
He made them a bagpipe from Zamora, and they, wearing their faces and
her eyes to honesty and her feet to lightness, the
best dancers in the world.
After this another dance of artifice entered and of what they call spoken. Was
of eight nymphs, divided into two rows: of the one row was the guide
god Cupid, and on the other, Interest; that one, adorned with wings, arch,
quiver and arrows; this one, dressed in rich and diverse colors of gold and silk.
The nymphs that followed Love carried on their backs, in white parchment and
large letters, their names written: poetry was the title of the first,
that of the second discretion, that of the third good lineage, that of the fourth
courage; in the same way, those that followed the Interest were indicated: it said
liberality the title of the first, gift that of the second, treasure that of
the third and the fourth peaceful possession. In front of everyone came a
wooden castle, which was thrown by four savages, all dressed in
ivy and hemp dyed green, so natural, that they almost scared
to Sancho. On the border of the castle and in all four parts of its
pictures had written: castle of good modesty. They made them four
skilled tambourine and flute players.
The Cupid dance began, and, having made two moves, raised his eyes
and he aimed his bow at a maiden who stood between the battlements of the
castle, to which such luck said:
-I am the mighty god
in the air and on the ground
and in the broad unified sea,
and as soon as the abyss encloses
in its hideous barrage.
I never knew what fear is;
everything I want I can,
even if I want the impossible,
and in everything that is possible
command, remove, put and veto.
He finished the couplet, shot an arrow over the top of the castle, and retreated to
your position. Then the Interest came out, and he made two other changes; the
drummers, and he said:
-I am the one who can more than Love,
and it is Love that guides me;
I am of the best breed
that heaven on earth breeds,
better known and older.
I am the Interest, in whom
few tend to do well,
and working without me is a great miracle;
and who am I, I consecrate myself,
forever and ever, amen.
Interest was withdrawn, and Poetry was carried forward; which, after having
made his moves like the others, set his eyes on the maiden of the
castle said:
-In very sweet concepts,
the sweetest Poetry,
high, low and discreet,
lady, the soul sends you
wrapped in a thousand sonnets.
If it doesn't bother you
my persistence, your fortune,
of many other invididas,
will be raised by me
on the fence of the moon.
Poetry deviated, and from the part of Interest came Liberality, and,
after his moves were done, he said:
-They call Liberality
when giving that the stretch flees
of lavishness,
and on the contrary, who argues
warm and weak will.
But I, to magnify you,
Today more, I must be lavish;
that, although it is a vice, it is an honest vice
and chest in love,
that in giving is seen.
In this way, all the two figures of the two left and retired.
squads, and each one made his moves and said his verses, some
elegant and some ridiculous, and only Don Quixote remembered - that the
I had large ones already mentioned; and then they all got mixed up, doing and
undoing ties with gentle grace and ease; and when the
Love ahead of the castle, he shot his arrows high, but the
Interest was breaking golden piggy banks in him.
Finally, after having danced a good space, Interest took out a
bag, which formed the skin of a great Roman cat, which seemed to be
full of money, and, throwing him at the castle, with the blow they dislodged
the boards and fell, leaving the maiden bare and defenseless
some. Interest arrived with the figures of his worth, and, casting it a great
gold chain around the neck, they showed to catch it, surrender it and captivate it; it
As seen by Love and its supporters, they made a move to take it off; and
all the demonstrations they did were to the beat of the tambourines, dancing
and dancing in concert. The savages put them at peace, who with
with great alacrity they reassembled and fit the castle planks, and the
The maiden closed herself into him as again, and with this the dance with
great satisfaction of those who looked at her.
Don Quixote asked one of the nymphs who had composed it and
tidy. He replied that a beneficiary of that town, who had a gentile
caletre for such inventions.
"I'll bet," said Don Quixote, "that he must be more of a friend to Camacho than to
Basilio is such a bachelor or beneficiary, and who must be more than satirical
than on the eve: Basilio's abilities and
the riches of Camacho!
Sancho Panza, who listened to everything, said:
-The king is my rooster: I abide by Camacho.
`` Anyway, '' said Don Quixote, `` it seems well, Sancho, that you are a villain and
those who say: "Long live who wins!"
"I don't know who I am," answered Sancho, "but I know well that I never made pots
I will draw from Basilio as elegant foam as is this that I have drawn from the
from Camacho.
And he showed him the cauldron full of geese and chickens, and, taking hold of one,
He began to eat with a lot of grace and wins, and said:
-To the beard of Basilio's skills! How much are you worth how much you have,
and you have as much as you are worth. There are only two lineages in the world, as I said
an agüela of mine, which are having and not having, although she to having is
Athena; and today, my lord Don Quixote, first you take your pulse at
to know: a gold-covered donkey looks better than a horse
saddled. So I say again that I abide by Camacho, whose pots
geese and chickens, hares and rabbits are abundant foams; and those of
Basilio will be, if he comes by hand, and even if he comes only to the foot, water him.
"Have you finished your harangue, Sancho?" Don Quixote said.
-I will have finished it -answered Sancho-, because I see that your grace receives
grief with her; that if this were not put in the way, work had
cut for three days.
`` Please God, Sancho, '' replied Don Quixote, `` that I see you speechless before I
I die.
`` At the rate we are taking, '' answered Sancho, `` before your grace dies.
I'll be chewing mud, and then it could be that I'm so mute that I don't
speak a word until the end of the world, or, at least, until the day of
Judgment.
"Even if that happens, oh Sancho!" Don Quixote replied, it will never come
your silence has come what you have spoken, you speak and you have to speak
in your life; and more, that it is very natural reason that first comes
the day of my death than yours; and thus, I never think to see you mute, nor
even when you are drinking or sleeping, which is what I can price.
`` In good faith, sir, '' answered Sancho, `` you cannot trust the
fleshless, I mean, in death, which also eats lamb like ram;
I have already heard our priest say that with the same foot he stepped on the high towers of
kings like the humble huts of the poor. Has this lady more than
power that of gingerbread: it is not disgusting at all, it eats everything and does everything, and
of all sorts of people, ages and preeminences, fill up your saddlebags. Is not
reaper who takes naps, who reaps at all hours, and thus cuts the
dry like green grass; and does not seem to chew, but to gobble and swallow
how much is put in front of him, because he has canine hunger, that never gets fed up;
and, although she does not have a belly, it implies that she is dropsic and thirsty for
drink alone the lives of those who live, like someone who drinks a jug of water
cold.
"No more, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this point. Tente in good, and do not
drop; that in truth that what you have said about death for your
Rough terms is what a good preacher might say. Tell you,
Sancho, if you have a good nature and discretion, you could take a
pulpit in hand and go through that world preaching niceties ...
`` He who lives well preaches, '' answered Sancho, `` and I don't know any other
tologies.
"You don't need them," said Don Quixote; but I don't quite understand or
reach how, being the beginning of wisdom the fear of God, you,
that you fear a lizard more than Him, you know so much.
`` Judge your mercy, sir, of your cavalry, '' answered Sancho, `` and I don't know
goal in judging the fears or bravery of others, how gentle fearful
I am of God like every child of a neighbor; and let me wake up your grace
this foam, that the rest are all idle words, that they have to us
ask for an account in the afterlife.
And, saying this, he began again to assault his cauldron, with such
good encouragement that Don Quixote's aroused, and it would undoubtedly help him, if
what is force would not prevent it from being said ahead.
Chapter XXI. Where Camacho's weddings continue, with other gourmets
events
When Don Quixote and Sancho were in the reasons referred to in the chapter
antecedent, great voices and great noise were heard, and they gave them and caused
those of the mares, who with a long run and shouting were going to greet the
bride and groom, who, surrounded by a thousand kinds of instruments and inventions,
They were accompanied by the priest, and the family of both, and all the
more lucid people from the surrounding places, all dressed for a party. AND
as Sancho saw the bride, he said:
-In good faith, she does not come dressed as a farmer, but rather as a palatial garrida.
Pardiez, according to what I can see, that the patenas that he had to bring are rich
corals, and the green palmilla of Cuenca is velvet of thirty hairs! AND
you mount that the garnish is made of strips of canvas, white !, I vote for me that it is
satin!; Well, take my hands, adorned with jet rings !: no
I thrive if they are not gold rings, and very gold, and paved with balls
white as a curd, each one must be worth an arm and a leg. Oh
whore, and what hair; that, if they are not false, I have not seen them anymore
No more blondes in my whole life! No, but put it cross in the verve and
in the waist, and do not compare it to a palm that moves loaded with bunches
of dates, which look the same as the charms that he brings earrings
hair and throat! I swear in my soul that she is a venerable wench, and
that can go through the banks of Flanders.
Don Quixote laughed at the rustic praises of Sancho Panza; it seemed to him that,
Outside of his mistress Dulcinea del Toboso, he had not seen a more beautiful woman
Never. The beautiful Quiteria was coming, somewhat discolored, and it must have been from the
bad night that brides always spend in making up for the day to come
of their weddings. They were approaching a theater that was on one side of the meadow,
adorned with rugs and bouquets, where weddings were to be made, and
from where dances and inventions were to look; and, at the time that
When they arrived at the post, they heard loud voices behind them, and one that said:
-Wait a bit, people as inconsiderate as hurried.
To whose voices and words they all turned their heads, and saw that he gave them
a man dressed, apparently, in a black robe, flecked with crimson to
calls. He was crowned - as it turned out later - with a wreath of doom
cypress; in his hands he carried a large cane. In getting closer, it was
known to all by the gallant Basilio, and all were suspended,
waiting where their voices and their words had to stop, fearing some
bad event of his coming in a similar season.
Finally he arrived, tired and out of breath, and, standing before the betrothed,
sticking the cane into the ground, which had the tale of a steel point,
color changed, eyes fixed on Quiteria, with a deep and hoarse voice,
these reasons said:
-You know well, unknown Quiteria, that according to the holy law that
we profess that living I, you cannot take a husband; and not together
You do not know that, by waiting for time and my diligence to improve the
goods of my fortune, I have not wanted to stop keeping the decorum that to your
honor was appropriate; but you, throwing behind your back all the obligations that
you owe to my good wish, you want to make lord of what is mine to another, whose
riches serve him not only for good fortune, but also for most beautiful fortune. AND
so that he has it full, and not as I think he deserves it, but as he
the heavens want to give it, I, through my hands, will undo the impossible or the
inconvenience that can get in the way, taking me out of the way. Live,
Long live the rich Camacho with the ungrateful Quiteria long and happy centuries, and
die, die poor Basilio, whose poverty cut off the wings of his happiness and
put in the grave!
And, saying this, he took hold of the stick that was stuck in the ground, and,
staying half of him on the ground, he showed that he served as a sheath to a
medium rapier that was hidden in him; and, putting what could be called
hilt on the ground, with slight carefree and determined purpose
threw on him, and at one point showed the bloody point behind his back,
with half of the steely blade, leaving the sad bathed in his blood and
lying on the ground, his own weapons pierced.
His friends then came to favor him, sorry for his misery and
pitiful misfortune; and, leaving Don Quixote to Rocinante, went to
favor him and took him in his arms, and found that he had not yet exhaled.
They wanted to take out his rapier, but the priest, who was present, was
seem that they were not removed before confessing, because the removal and the
exhaling would be all at once. But, coming to Basilio a little, with
sorrowful and faint voice said:
-If you wanted, cruel Quiteria, give me in this last and forced trance the
hand of wife, I would still think that my recklessness would have excuse, because in
she achieved the good of being yours.
The priest, hearing this, told him to attend to the health of the soul before
that to the tastes of the body, and that I asked God for forgiveness of
his sins and his desperate determination. To which Basilio replied
that in no way would he confess if first Quiteria did not shake his hand
to be his wife: that this contentment would marinate his will and give him
encouragement to confess.
When Don Quixote heard the request of the wounded man, in loud voices he said that
Basilio asked a very just and reasoned thing, and also, very doable,
and that Mr. Camacho would be so honored to receive Mrs. Quiteria
widow of the brave Basilio as if received from his father's side:
-Here there must not be more than one yes, which has no other effect than the
pronounce him, since the thalamus of these weddings must be the grave.
Camacho heard everything, and everything was suspenseful and confused, without knowing what
do or what to say; but the voices of Basilio's friends were so many,
asking him to allow Quiteria to give him the hand of a wife, because
his soul was not lost, leaving desperate this life, which moved him,
and they even forced, to say that if Quiteria wanted to give it to him, that he
happy, because everything was to delay for a moment the fulfillment of his
wishes.
Then they all came to Quiteria, some with prayers and others with tears,
and others with effective reasons, persuaded her to shake hands with the poor
Basil; and she, harder than marble and more skewed than a statue,
He showed that he neither knew nor could, nor did he want to answer a word; not even
answer if the priest did not tell her to determine quickly in what
had to do, because Basilio already had his soul in his teeth, and
Instead of waiting for unsolved determinations.
Then the beautiful Quiteria, without answering a word, embarrassed,
looking sad and regretful, she arrived where Basilio was, and her eyes rolled back,
his breath short and hasty, muttering between his teeth the name of
Quiteria, showing signs of dying as a gentile, and not as a Christian. I arrive,
Anyway, Quiteria, and, on her knees, asked her hand by signs, and did not
by words. Basilio's eyes widened, and, looking at her carefully,
said:
-Oh Quiteria, who have come to be pious in time when your piety must
serve as a knife that has just taken my life, because I no longer have the strength
to bring the glory that you give me in choosing me for yours, nor to suspend
the pain that so quickly is covering my eyes with the frightening shadow
of death! What I beg of you is, oh my fatal star, that the hand
that you ask and want to give me, not for fulfillment, nor to deceive me
again, but confess and say that, without straining your will, I
You hand it over and give it to me as your legitimate husband; Well, it is not a reason that in
a trance like this deceive me, or use pretense with whom so many
truths has dealt with you.
Among these reasons, he fainted, so that everyone present thought
that each fainting had to take the soul with it. Quiteria, all honest
and all shameful, grasping Basilio's with her right hand, said to him:
-No force would be enough to twist my will; and so, with the most
free that I have, I give you the hand of a legitimate wife, and I receive yours, if it is
that you give it to me of your free will, without disturbing it or contrasting the
calamity in which your accelerated speech has put you.
`` Yes, I do, '' answered Basilio, `` not disturbed or confused, but with the clear
understanding that heaven wanted to give me; and so, I give myself and I give myself for you
husband.
`` And I for your wife, '' Quiteria answered, `` now live long years.
take from my arms to the grave.
`` For this young man to be so hurt, '' Sancho Panza said at this point, `` a lot
speaks; make him stop complaining and attend to his soul, that, to me
It seems that he has it more on his tongue than on his teeth.
With Basilio and Quiteria holding hands, the priest, tender and
tearful, he blessed them and asked heaven to give a good rest to the soul of the
new bride; which, as well as received the blessing, with a loan
lightly rose to his feet, and with unseen ease he drew his rapier,
to whom his body served as a sheath.
All the bystanders were admired, and some of them, simpler
that curious, in loud voices, they began to say:
"Miracle, miracle!"
But Basilio replied:
-Not "miracle, miracle", but industry, industry!
The priest, inattentive and astonished, reached out with both hands to feel the wound,
and found that the cleaver had passed, not through the meat and ribs of
Basilio, but by a hollow iron cannon that, full of blood, in that
well accommodated place had; prepared the blood, as it later became known, from
so that it does not freeze.
Finally, the priest and Camacho, with all the others around, had a
for mocked and mocked. The wife showed no sign of regret for the
derision; before, hearing that that marriage, for having been deceitful,
it was not to be valid, he said that she confirmed him again; which
they all agreed that with the consent and wisdom of the two they had
plotted that case, what was left Camacho and his supporters so fierce
who sent their vengeance to the hands, and, drawing many swords,
attacked Basilio, in whose favor in an instant they were almost unsheathed
many others. And, taking the lead on horseback Don Quixote, with the spear
on his arm and well covered with his shield, he made the place of everyone.
Sancho, who was never plugged or entertained by such misdeeds,
welcomed the jars, where he had drawn his pleasant foam, appearing to him
that place as sacred, to be held in respect. Don Quixote,
loudly, he said:
-Have, gentlemen, hold, that is no reason take revenge for grievances
that love makes us; and notice that love and war are the same
thing, and just as in war it is a lawful and customary thing to use tricks
and stratagems to defeat the enemy, as well in contests and competitions
love affairs are considered good the lies and entanglements that are made to
achieve the desired end, unless they are in detriment and dishonor of the
beloved thing. Quiteria belonged to Basilio, and Basilio de Quiteria, for fair and
favorable arrangement of heaven. Camacho is rich, and he will be able to buy his
taste when, where and how I want. Basilio has no more this sheep, and no
Someone has to take it away, no matter how powerful it may be; that to the two that God
together it will not be able to separate the man; and the one who will try, must first
pass through the tip of this spear.
And, in this, he wielded it so hard and so deft that it put fear in
all who did not know him, and so intensely he was fixed in the imagination
Camacho's disdain for Quiteria, who erased her from her memory in a
instant; and thus the persuasions of the priest took place with him, who was
prudent and well-intentioned man, with whom Camacho and those of
its peaceful and calm partiality; as a sign of which the
swords to their places, blaming Quiteria's ease more than
Basilio's industry; making speech Camacho that if Quiteria wanted well
to Basilio maiden, she would also like him married, and that she should give thanks
to heaven, more for having taken it from him than for having given it to him.
Comforted, then, and peaceful Camacho and those of his mesnada, all those of the
Basilio calmed down, and the rich Camacho, for showing that he did not feel the
mockery, nor did he esteem her at all, he wanted the parties to go on like
if he really married; but Basilio and his
wife or henchmen; and so, they went to the village of Basilio, who also
virtuous and discreet poor have someone who follows, honors and protects, as
the rich have someone to flatter and accompany them.
They took Don Quixote with them, esteeming him as a man of courage and hair.
on chest. Only Sancho's soul was darkened, for being incapacitated
waiting for Camacho's splendid food and parties, which lasted until the
evening; and so, saddened and sad, he followed his lord, who with the gang
of Basilio went, and thus he left behind the pots of Egypt, although he carried them
in the soul, whose almost consumed and finished foam, which in the cauldron
he carried, represented to him the glory and the abundance of the good that he lost; and
thus, heartbroken and thoughtful, though not hungry, without alighting from the white,
he followed in Rocinante's footsteps.
Chapter XXII. Where he realizes the great adventure of the cave of
Montesinos, who is in the heart of La Mancha, to whom the
brave Don Quixote de la Mancha
Great were and many the gifts that the bride and groom made to Don
Quixote, bound by the samples he had given defending his cause, and
Along with bravery, they graduated discretion, considering him a Cid in
arms and by a Cicero in eloquence. Good Sancho rejoiced
three days at the expense of the couple, of which it was learned that it was not trace
communicated with the beautiful Quiteria to feignly hurt, but industry
of Basilio, waiting from her for the same event that had been seen; well it is
truth that he confessed that he had given part of his thought to some of his
friends, so that at the necessary time they would favor their intention and pay
his deception.
"One cannot and must not call deceit," said Don Quixote, "those who put the
look in virtuous ends.
And that the marriage of lovers was the end of more excellence,
warning that the greatest opposite that love has is hunger and
continual need, because love is all joy, rejoicing and contentment, and
more when the lover is in possession of the loved thing, against whom they are
opposing enemies declared want and poverty; and that all this
he said with the intention that Mr. Basilio should stop exercising the
skills that you know, that, although they made him famous, they did not give him money, and that
attend to farm property by lawful and industrious means, which never
the prudent and diligent are lacking.
-The poor honest man, if the poor man can be honest, has a pledge on
have a beautiful woman, who, when they take her away, they take away her honor and
they kill. The beautiful and honest woman, whose husband is poor, deserves to be
crowned with laurels and palms of expiration and triumph. The beauty, for
alone, attracts the wills of those who look at it and know it, and
The golden eagles and haughty birds are lowered by a lure;
But if such beauty is joined by necessity and narrowness,
crows, kites and other birds of prey also attack her; and
The one that stands so many firm encounters well deserves to be called the crown of her
husband. Look, discreet Basilio - added Don Quixote -: opinion was of I do not know
how wise that there was not in the whole world but one good woman, and gave
for advice that each one thought and believed that that single good was the
hers, and so he would live happily. I am not married, not even now has it come to me
in thought to be; and, with all this, I would dare to give advice to
he asked me the way he had to look for the woman with whom he wanted
marry. First of all, I would advise you to look more to fame than to
hacienda, because a good woman does not achieve good fame just by being
good, if not looking so; that much more damage the honors of women
the civil liberties and indulgences that the secret evils. If you bring
good woman to your house, an easy thing would be to keep her, and even improve her, in
that goodness; But if you bring it bad, it will work for you to amend it:
that it is not very feasible to go from one extreme to another. I do not say that it is
impossible, but I consider it difficult.
Sancho heard all this, and said among himself:
-This my master, when I speak things of substance and substance, he usually says
that I could take a pulpit in my hands and go through that world forward
preaching niceties; and I say of him that when he begins to string sentences
and to give advice, he can not only take the pulpit in his hands, but two in
each finger, and walk through those squares what do you want mouth? Fuck the devil
for a knight errant, you know so many things! I thought in my soul that
he could only know that which touched his knights, but there is nothing
where it doesn't bite and stop putting your spoonful.
Sancho was muttering this something, and his lord heard him, and asked him:
-What are you whispering, Sancho?
"I don't say anything, nor do I murmur anything," answered Sancho; i was just saying
between me that I wish I had heard what your grace here has said before
that he would marry me, that perhaps I would say now: "The ox loose licks well."
-Is your Teresa that bad, Sancho? Don Quixote said.
"It is not very bad," replied Sancho, "but it is not very good; at least it's not
as good as I would like.
`` You are wrong, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` in saying bad things about your wife, who, in
Indeed, she is the mother of your children.
`` We don't owe each other anything, '' answered Sancho, `` she too says bad things about me.
when she feels like it, especially when she's jealous, then let her suck it
Satan himself.
Finally, three days they were with the couple, where they were given and
served as bodies of king. Don Quixote asked the right-handed lawyer
give a guide to lead him to the cave of Montesinos, because he had
great desire to enter it and see if they were true
wonders that were said about her by all those contours. The
The graduate told him that he would give him a cousin of his, a famous student and very
fond of reading chivalric books, which with great will
He would put at the mouth of the cave itself, and would show him the Ruidera lagoons,
famous ansimism throughout La Mancha, and even throughout Spain; and told him that
would gladly bring with him entertainment, because he was a waiter who knew
make books to print and to address to princes. Finally, the
cousin came with a pregnant colt, whose packet covered a gay rug or
burlap. Sancho saddled Rocinante and dressed the red deer, provided his
saddlebags, which were accompanied by those of the cousin, also well supplied,
and, commending themselves to God and saying goodbye to everyone, they set out on their way,
taking the defeat of the famous cave of Montesinos.
On the way, Don Quixote asked his cousin what kind and quality were his
exercises, their profession and studies; to which he replied that his
profession was to be a humanist; his exercises and studies, compose books
to give the picture, all of great benefit and no less entertainment
for the republic; that one was entitled the one with the liveries, where he paints
seven hundred and three liveries, with their colors, nicknames and figures, whence
they could take out and take whatever they wanted in time of festivities and rejoicing the
courtly gentlemen, without going around begging from anyone, or lambicating,
as they say, the cerbelo, for taking them out according to their wishes and intentions.
-Because I give to the jealous, the scorned, the forgotten and the absent
they agree, that more righteous than sinful will come to them. I have another book
also, whom I have to call Metamorphoses, or Spanish Ovid, of invention
new and rare; because in it, imitating Ovid in a burlesque way, I paint who
It was the Giralda of Seville and the Angel of the Madalena, who the Caño de
Vecinguerra, from Córdoba, who the Bulls of Guisando, the Sierra Morena,
the sources of Leganitos and Lavapiés, in Madrid, not forgetting the
Piojo, from the Caño Dorado and the Priora; and this, with its allegories,
metaphors and translations, so that they cheer, suspend and teach a
same point. I have another book, which I call Virgilio Polidoro Supplement,
which deals with the invention of things, which is of great erudition and
study, because the things that Polidoro stopped saying of great
substance, I find out, and declare them by gentle style. Forgot to
Virgilio to tell us who was the first to have a cold in the world,
and the first one who took the anointings to cure himself of gallic disease, and I
I declare to the letter, and I authorize it with more than twenty-five
authors: because see your mercy if I have worked well and if it has to be useful
such a book to everyone.
Sancho, who had been very attentive to the cousin's narration, told him:
Tell me, sir, so God will give you a good right in the printing of your
books: could you tell me, yes you will know, well you know everything, who was the
first that he scratched his head, which for me I have it must have been
our father Adam?
`` Yes, it would be, '' replied the cousin, `` because there is no doubt that Adam had
head and hair; and, this being so, and being the first man in the world,
would ever scratch.
"I think so," answered Sancho; but tell me now: who was the first
Turner of the world?
`` Indeed, brother, '' replied the cousin, `` I will not know how to determine by
now, until I study it. I will study it, returning to where I have my
books, and I will satisfy you when we meet again, which is not to be this
the last.
`` Well, sir, '' replied Sancho, `` don't take work on this, I've now
realizing what I have asked him. Know that the first flipper
of the world was Lucifer, when he was thrown out of heaven, who came
turning to the abyss.
"You're right, friend," said the cousin.
And Don Quixote said:
-That question and answer is not yours, Sancho: you have heard someone say.
`` Street, sir, '' Sancho replied, `` in good faith, if I ask and ask
to answer, that it does not end between now and tomorrow. Yes, what to ask
nonsense and answer nonsense I do not need to go looking for help from
neighbors.
"You have said more, Sancho, than you know," said Don Quixote; that there are some
who tire of knowing and finding out things that, after knowing and
found out, they don't matter a bit to the understanding or to the memory.
In these and other delightful talks that day passed, and at night they
housed in a small village, where the cousin told Don Quixote that
from there to the cave of Montesinos there were no more than two leagues, and if
had determined to enter it, it was necessary to provide ropes, to
tie up and hang down in its depth.
Don Quixote said that, even if he reached the abyss, he had to see where he stopped;
and so they bought almost a hundred fathoms of rope, and another day, at two in the
late, they came to the cave, whose mouth is spacious and wide, but full of
cambroneras and cabrahígos, of brambles and weeds, so thick and intricate,
that blind and hide her from everything in everything. Seeing her, the cousin got out,
Sancho and Don Quixote, to whom the two then bound him very strongly with
the ropes; and while they were girdling and girding him, Sancho said to him:
-Look at your mercy, my lord, what you do: do not want to bury yourself in
life, or put where it looks like a jar that they put to cool in some
water well. Yes, it is not your turn or concern to be the scrutinizer
emphasize that it must be worse than dungeon.
`` Tie and shut up, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that such an undertaking as here, Sancho
friend, for me it was saved.
And then the guide said:
-I beg your mercy, Mr. Don Quixote, to take a good look and speculate with
a hundred eyes what is there inside: maybe there will be things that I put in the
book of my Transformations.
"In your hands is the tambourine that will know how to play well," answered Sancho Panza.
Having said this and having finished Don Quixote's ligature - which was not on the harness,
but on the doublet to arm, said Don Quixote:
-Inadvertently we have walked in not having provided us with some esquilón
little one, who was tied next to me in this very rope, with whose sound he
understand that he was still coming down and was alive; but, well, it is no longer possible,
the hand of God, guide me.
And then he got down on his knees and said a quiet prayer to heaven,
asking God to help him and give him good success in that, apparently,
dangerous and new adventure, and in a loud voice he then said:
-Oh lady of my actions and movements, very clear and unparalleled Dulcinea del
Toboso! If it is possible that prayers and prayers reach your ears
from your lucky lover, for your unprecedented beauty I beg you to listen to them,
that they are none other than begging you not to deny me your favor and protection, now that
so much I need him. I am going to fall, to immerse myself and to sink into the
abyss that is represented to me here, just because the world knows that if you
you favor, there will be no impossible to whom I do not attack and finish.
And, in saying this, he approached the chasm; saw not being possible to get off the hook,
nor make room at the entrance, if it was not by force of arms, or by stabbing,
and thus, putting his hand to the sword, he began to knock down and cut off those
weeds that were at the mouth of the cave, by whose noise and roar
an infinity of very great crows and rooks came out of it, so
thick and in such a hurry that they struck Don Quixote on the ground; what about if He
was as ominous as a Christian Catholic, it was a bad sign and
he would excuse himself from shutting himself up in such a place.
Finally he got up, and, seeing that no more crows or other birds were coming out
noturnal, as were bats, which also came out among the crows,
giving him rope the cousin and Sancho, he let himself sink to the bottom of the cavern
gruesome; and, upon entering, Sancho casting his blessing on him and
a thousand crosses, said:
-God guide you and the Rock of France, together with the Trinity of Gaeta, flower,
cream and foam of the knights errant! There you go, bravery of the world,
heart of steel, arms of bronze! God guide you, again, and make you
free, healthy and without caution in the light of this life, which you leave to bury yourself in
this darkness you are looking for!
Almost the same prayers and deprecations did the cousin.
Don Quixote was calling out to give him rope and more rope, and they gave it to him.
they gave little by little; and when the voices, which were channeled through the cave, came out,
they stopped being heard, they already had the hundred fathoms of rope down, and
they seemed to go back up to Don Quixote, since they could not give him
more rope. With all that, they stopped for about half an hour, after which
space they returned to pick up the rope very easily and without any weight,
a sign that made them imagine that Don Quixote was staying inside; and,
believing it so, Sancho wept bitterly and pulled in great haste for
disappointed, but, arriving, in his opinion, a little over eighty
fathoms, they felt weight, of which in extreme they were glad. Finally, at
ten distinctly saw Don Quixote, to whom Sancho cried out,
telling him:
May your mercy be very well returned, my lord, we already thought that
it was left there for caste.
But Don Quixote did not answer a word; and, taking him out completely, they saw that
his eyes were closed, showing signs of being asleep. They held him in the
ground and they slipped him, and with all this he did not wake up; but they both came back to him
and stirred, shook and wiggled, which after a good space returned
itself, stretching, well as if from some grave and deep sleep
wake up; and, looking from one side to the other, as if frightened, he said:
-God forgive you, friends; that you have taken from me the tastiest and
nice life and sight that no human has seen or been through. Indeed,
Now I just learned that all the happy people in this life pass as a shadow
and I dream, or they fade like the flower of the field. Oh unfortunate Montesinos!
Oh bad ferido Durandarte! Oh no luck Belerma! Oh tearful Guadiana, and
you without the happiness of Ruidera, who show in your waters what
your beautiful eyes cried!
The cousin and Sancho listened to the words of Don Quixote, who said them
as if with immense pain they were removed from the entrails. They begged him
let him understand what he was saying, and tell them what in that hell there was
viewed.
-Hell are you calling him? said Don Quixote; Well, do not call him ansí, because
it does not deserve it, as you will see later.
He asked that they give him something to eat, which was extremely hungry. They tended
the cousin's burlap on the green grass, they went to the pantry of their
saddlebags, and, all three of them seated in good love and company,
they dined all together. With the burlap raised, Don Quixote de la Mancha said:
-No one gets up, and stay with me, children, all attentive.
Chapter XXIII. Of the admirable things that the shocked Don Quixote recounted
that he had seen in the deep cave of Montesinos, whose impossibility and
greatness makes this adventure apocryphal
Four in the afternoon would be when the sun, between clouds covered, with light
scarce and temperate rays, gave place to Don Quixote so that, without heat and
grief, he told his two very clear listeners what in the cave of
Montesinos had seen. And it started in the following way:
-A work of twelve or fourteen states of the depth of this dungeon, at the
right hand, a concavity and space is made capable of being able to fit in it
a big cart with its mules. Shine a small light through a few cracks or
holes, which respond to him from afar, opened in the surface of the earth.
This concavity and space I saw in time when I was already tired and sulking from
see me, hanging and hanging from the rope, walking through that dark region
down, without taking a certain or certain path; and thus, I determined to enter
in it and get some rest. I said voices, asking you not to pick up any more
rope until I told you, but you shouldn't have heard me. I was picking up
the rope that you sent, and, making a thread or pile of it, I sat
over him, thoughtful as well, considering what he had to do to get the
background, having no one to support me; and, being in this thought and
Confusion, suddenly and without trying, a very deep dream skipped me; and,
when I least thought about it, without knowing how or how not, I woke up from him and found
in the middle of the most beautiful, pleasant and delightful meadow that the
nature nor imagine the most discreet human imagination. I unleashed the
eyes, wipe them, and I saw that he was not sleeping, but was really awake;
with all this, I tempted my head and breasts, to certify if it was me
The one who was there himself, or some vain and distorted ghost; but
the touch, the feeling, the concerted speeches that he made between me,
they certified that I was there then who I am here now. Offered to me
then into view a royal and sumptuous palace or fortress, whose walls and
walls appeared to be made of transparent, clear fabricated glass; which one
opening two large doors, I saw that he came out through them and he came to me
a venerable old man, dressed in a hood of purple cloth, who by the
the ground dragged him: a college scholarship girded his shoulders and breasts,
green satin; a black Milanese cap covered his head, and his beard,
very gray, it passed her waist; He had no weapon, but a rosary
of beads in hand, larger than medium walnuts, and the tens also
like medium ostrich eggs; the continent, the step, the gravity and the
wide presence, each thing in itself and all together, they suspended me and
they admired. He came to me, and the first thing he did was hold me tightly,
and then say to me: `` Long ago, brave knight Don Quixote de la
Mancha, that those of us in these enchanted solitudes hope to see you,
so that you give news to the world of what the deep cave encloses and covers
where you have entered, called the cave of Montesinos: feat only saved
To be attacked by your invincible heart and your stupendo spirit. Come
with me, sir, that I want to show you the wonders that this
transparent alcazar flap, of whom I am the warden and major guard
perpetual, because I am the same Montesinos, from whom the cave takes its name. ''
He hardly told me that it was Montesinos, when I asked him if it was true what
in the world up here it was told: that he had taken from half the
chest, with a small dagger, the heart of his great friend Durandarte and
taking him to Señora Belerma, as he sent him to the point of his death.
He replied that they were telling the truth in everything, except in the dagger, because it was not a dagger,
not small, but a sharp dagger, sharper than an awl.
`` It must have been, '' Sancho said at this point, `` the so-called dagger of Ramón de Hoces, the
Sevillian.
`` I don't know, '' don Quixote continued, `` but it wouldn't be a dagger, because Ramón
de Hoces was yesterday, and the one in Roncesvalles, where this misfortune occurred, has
many years; and this inquiry is not of importance, neither disturbs nor alters
the truth and I answer the story.
"That's right," replied the cousin; continue your grace, Mr. Don Quixote,
that I listen to you with the greatest pleasure in the world.
"No less I count it," answered Don Quixote; and so, I say that the
venerable Montesinos took me into the crystalline palace, where in a room
low, very cool supermode and all made of alabaster, was a tomb of
marble, with great skill made, on which I saw a gentleman
stretched from length to length, not of bronze, nor of marble, nor of jasper made,
as there are usually in other tombs, but of pure meat and pure
bones. He had his right hand (which, in my opinion, is somewhat hairy and nervous,
sign of having a lot of strength its owner) placed on the side of the heart,
and, before I asked Montesinos anything, seeing myself in suspense looking at the
grave, he told me: `` This is my friend Durandarte, flower and mirror of the
loving and brave knights of their time; have him here enchanted,
as he has me and many others, Merlin, that French
charming that they say he was the son of the devil; and what I think is no
He was the son of the devil, but knew, as they say, one point more than the devil.
Nobody knows how or why we loved it, and they will say walking the
times, which are not very far, as I imagine. What admires me is
that I know, as certain as it is now daylight, that Durandarte finished his
life in my arms, and that after death I took out his heart with my
own hands; and in truth it must have weighed two pounds, because, according to the
natural, he who has a greater heart is endowed with greater courage than
has him small. Well, this being so, and that this really died
gentleman, how do you now complain and sigh from time to time, as if
was he alive? '' This said, the miserable Durandarte, giving a great voice,
said:
'' Oh, my cousin Montesinos!
The last thing that I begged you,
that when I am dead,
and my soul torn away,
that you carry my heart
where Belerma was,
taking me off the chest,
now with a dagger, now with a dagger. ''
Hearing which the venerable Montesinos, knelt before the
wounded gentleman, and, with tears in his eyes, said to him: `` Yes, sir
Durandarte, my very expensive cousin, I already did what you sent me in the dark
day of our loss: I took your hearts out the best I could, without
leave you a minimum part in the chest; I cleaned him with a handkerchief
tips; I left with him on the race for France, having placed you first
in the bosom of the earth, with so many tears, which were enough to
wash my hands and wipe the blood they had with them, if they had
walked in the entrails; and, for more signs, cousin of my soul, in the first
place that I came across, leaving Roncesvalles, I put a little salt in your
heart, because it did not smell bad, and was, if not fresh, at least beloved,
in the presence of Mrs. Belerma; which, with you, and with me, and with
Guadiana, your squire, and with the owner Ruidera and her seven daughters and two
nieces, and with many other of your acquaintances and friends, has us here
enchanted the wise Merlin many years ago; and, although they exceed five hundred,
none of us has died: only Ruidera and her daughters and
nieces, who crying, out of compassion that Merlin must have
from them, turned them into so many gaps that now, in the world of
the living and in the province of La Mancha, they call them the lagoons of
Ruidera; the seven are of the kings of Spain, and the two nieces, of the
knights of a most holy order, which they call Saint John. Guadiana,
your squire, also mourning your misfortune, was turned into a
river named after his own name; which, when it reached the surface of the
earth and saw the sun from the other sky, was so much regret that he felt to see
who left you, who plunged into the bowels of the earth; but, of course
It is possible to stop going to its natural current, from time to time it comes out
and it shows itself where the sun and the people see it. Vanle managing their
waters the aforementioned lagoons, with which and with many others that are
they arrive, he enters Portugal grand and pompous. But, with all this, for
wherever he goes he shows his sadness and melancholy, and does not pride himself on
breed in its waters gifted and esteemed fish, but rather crude and tasteless,
very different from those of the Golden Tagus; and what now I tell you, oh cousin
mine !, I have told you many times; and, since you don't answer me, I imagine not
Do you give me credit, or you do not hear me, of what I receive so much pain as God
knows. I want to give you some new ones now, which, since they do not serve as
relief from your pain, they will not increase it in any way. Know what
you have here in your presence, and open your eyes and you will see it, that great
knight of whom so many things have prophesied the wise Merlin, that
Don Quixote de la Mancha, I say, that again and with greater advantages than in
the past centuries have resurrected in the present the already forgotten andante
cavalry, by whose means and favor it might be that we were
disenchanted; that great deeds for great men are
saved. '' "And when it is not," replied the injured Durandarte with
faint and low voice-, when it is not so, oh cousin! I say, patience and
shuffle''. And, turning on his side, he returned to his customary silence, without
speak more word. In this great screams and cries were heard,
accompanied by deep groans and anguished sobs; I turned my head, and
I saw through the glass walls that a procession of two passed through another room.
rows of most beautiful maidens, all dressed in mourning, with turbans
whites on their heads, in the turquoise way. At the end and end of the rows
A lady was coming, who in gravity seemed like it, also dressed in black,
with white headdresses so stretched and long, that they kissed the earth. His turban
he was twice as old as any of the others; was browed and the
somewhat flat nose; the big mouth, but red the lips; teeth,
that perhaps he discovered them, they showed to be sparse and not well worn, although
they were white as peeled almonds; he had a canvas in his hands
thin, and between him, as far as I could make out, a heart of mummy flesh,
as it came dry and bruised. Montesinos told me like all those people from
The procession were servants of Durandarte and Belerma, who there with their
two lords were delighted, and that the last, which brought the heart between
the canvas and in her hands, was Mrs. Belerma, who with her maids
four days a week they made that procession and sang, or, for better
I mean, they wept laments over the body and over the wounded heart of their
cousin; and if she had seemed somewhat ugly to me, or not as beautiful as she had
fame, it was the cause of bad nights and worse days than in that enchantment
it happened, as I could see in her big dark circles and her brittle color.
`` And his yellowness and his dark circles do not take occasion to be with the mensil evil,
ordinary in women, because many months, and even years, have not
does not even appear through its doors, but the pain that his heart feels for him
that he continually holds in his hands, that renews and brings to mind the
misfortune of her ill-accomplished lover; that if this were not, just the
equal in beauty, grace and verve the great Dulcinea del Toboso, so
celebrated in all these contours, and even all over the world. '' '' Traps
that two! I said then, Senor Don Montesinos: tell your mercy your
history as it should, who already knows that any comparison is hateful, and thus, no
there is no point in comparing anyone with anyone. The unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso is
who is, and Mrs. Doña Belerma is who she is, and who has been, and stay
here''. To which he replied: `` Mr. Don Quixote, forgive me, your
Thank you, that I confess that I was wrong, and I did not say well in saying that I barely
would equal Mrs. Dulcinea to Mrs. Belerma, since it was enough for me to have
understood, by I do not know what suspicions, that your mercy is his knight, for
that I bite my tongue before comparing it but with heaven itself. ''
With this satisfaction that the great Montesinos gave me my heart calmed down.
I was startled to hear that my wife was compared to Belerma.
"And I still marvel," said Sancho, "how your grace did not go up
on the old man, and kicked all his bones, and peeled off his beards,
without leaving hair on them.
`` No, Sancho my friend, '' answered Don Quixote, `` it was not right for me to do
that, because we are all obliged to have respect for the elderly, although
do not be gentlemen, and especially those who are and are enchanted;
I know well that we are not left to owe anything in many other demands and
answers that between the two of us.
At this time the cousin said:
-I do not know, Mr. Don Quixote, how your grace in so little space of
time as he has been down there, he has seen so many things and talked and
answered so much.
-How long have I been down? asked Don Quixote.
"A little over an hour," answered Sancho.
`` That cannot be, '' replied Don Quixote, `` because it got dark there and
it dawned, and it returned to dusk and dawn three times; so, to me
account, three days I have been in those remote and hidden parts to the
our view.
"It must be true, my lord," said Sancho, "that, like all things that
have happened to him are by enchantment, perhaps what seems to us a
time, it must seem there three days and nights.
"It will be," answered Don Quixote.
"And has your grace eaten all this time, my lord?" asked the
cousin.
`` I have not had a bite to eat breakfast, '' answered Don Quixote, `` I have not even had
hunger, not for thought.
-And the enchanted ones, do they eat? said the cousin.
"They do not eat," answered Don Quixote, "nor do they have larger excrements; although it is
opinion that their nails, beards and hair grow.
"And do the enchanted sleep, by any chance, sir?" asked Sancho.
"No, by the way," answered Don Quixote; at least, in these three days that
I've been with them, none of them have slept, and neither have I.
-The saying fits well here -said Sancho- tell me who you hang out with, tell you
I know who you are: let your mercy be with enchanted fasts and vigilantes,
see if it is a lot that neither eat nor sleep while with them. But
forgive me your grace, my lord, if I tell you that of all that has been here
I said, take me God, what would the devil say, if I believe anything.
-How not? said the cousin, `` well, was Senor Don Quixote going to lie,
that, even if I wanted to, there was no place to compose and imagine so much
million lies?
"I don't think my lord is lying," answered Sancho.
-If not, what do you think? Don Quixote asked him.
`` I think, '' answered Sancho, `` that that Merlin, or those charming ones
they enchanted all the rabble that your grace says they have seen and
communicated down there, they fitted in his mind or memory all that
machine that has told us, and everything that remains to be told.
`` All that could be, Sancho, '' replied Don Quixote, `` but it is not so, because
what I have told I saw with my own eyes and I touched it with myself
hands. But what will you say when I tell you now how, among other infinite
things and wonders that Montesinos showed me, which slowly and
times I will tell you in the speech of our trip, for not being
all of them from this place, he showed me three peasant women who
fields were jumping and skipping like goats; and, I had hardly seen them,
when I met the one being the unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso, and the other two
those same laborers who came with her, that we talked to at the exit
del Toboso? I asked Montesinos if he knew them, he replied that he did not, but
that he imagined they must be some delighted leading ladies,
that few days had seemed in those meadows; and what not to me
marveled at this, because there were many other ladies from the past
and present centuries, enchanted in different and strange figures, among the
whom he knew Queen Guinevere and her owner Quintañona, pouring out the
came to Lanzarote,
when he came from Brittany.
When Sancho Panza heard his master say this, he thought he would lose his mind, or
hilarious; that, as he knew the truth of the feigned charm of
Dulcinea, of whom he had been the charmer and lifter of such
testimony, he undoubtedly just learned that his master was out of
judgment and crazy of all points; and thus, he said:
-In a bad situation and in a worse season and in an unfortunate day your mercy fell,
dear boss of mine, to the other world, and in a bad point he met the lord
Montesinos, how did he get back? Your grace was well here
up with his entire judgment, just as God had given him, speaking
sentences and giving advice at every step, and not now, counting the largest
nonsense you can imagine.
`` As I know you, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` I don't pay attention to your
words.
`` Neither am I one of your kind, '' replied Sancho, `` I even
Hurt, even kill me for what I have said, or for what I think
say if yours is not corrected and amended. But tell me your mercy,
now that we are at peace: how or in what did you meet the lady our mistress? AND
If he did speak it, what did he say, and what did he answer?
`` Know her, '' answered Don Quixote, `` in that she brings the same dresses that she wore.
when you showed me I spoke her, but she did not answer me a word; before, I
she turned her back, and fled with such a hurry, that she did not reach her
a rockrose. I wanted to follow her, and I would, if Montesinos did not advise me to
I did not get tired of it, because it would be in vain, and more because the
time where it was convenient for me to get out of the chasm again. I also told myself that,
in time, I would be told how he was to be disenchanted, and
Belerma and Durandarte, with all those who were there; but what is most sad
he gave me, of which I saw and noticed there, it was that, Montesinos was saying to me
these reasons, it came to me on the one hand, without my seeing it coming, one of
the two companions of the unfortunate Dulcinea, and, eyes full of
tears, with a disturbed and low voice, he said to me: `` My lady Dulcinea del Toboso
kisses your mercy hands, and begs your mercy make it of
let her know how you are; and that, being in great need, likewise
he begs at your mercy, how earnestly may he be served
lend you on this skirt that I bring here, made of cotton, new, average
dozen reales, or those that your grace may have, that she gives her word
to return them very briefly. '' He suspended me and I admired the such message,
and, turning to Mr. Montesinos, I asked him: '' Is it possible, Mr.
Montesinos, that the principal charmed are in need? '' To which he
He replied: '' Believe me, your favor, Don Quixote de la Mancha, that
this one that they call necessity wherever it is used, and for everything it is extended,
everyone reaches, and even the enchanted ones do not forgive; and, well, the lady
Dulcinea del Toboso sends to ask for those six reales, and the garment is good,
apparently there is nothing but to give them; that, without a doubt, must be set in
some big bind. '' `` Prenda, I will not take it, '' I replied, `` no less
I will give you what you ask for, because I have only four reales ''; which
I gave him (which were the ones that you, Sancho, gave me the other day to give alms
to the poor that he ran into on the roads), and I said to him: `` Say, my friend, to
your lady who weighs on my soul for her work, and who would like to
be a Fucar to remedy them; and what do I let you know that I can't and shouldn't
be healthy lacking his pleasant eyesight and discreet conversation, and that
I beg you, how earnestly I can, may your mercy be served
see and deal with your captive servant and well-trained knight. You will tell him
also that, when you least think about it, you will hear how I have done a
oath and vow, like the one made by the Marquis of Mantua, to avenge
to his nephew Baldovinos, when he found him to exhale in the middle of the
montiña, which was from not eating bread to tablecloths, with the other trifles that
there he added, until he avenged him; And so I will do to him not to calm down, and to walk the
seven games of the world, with more punctuality than the infant don
Pedro of Portugal, until she was disenchanted. '' '' All that, and more, owes your
thanks to my lady, '' the maid replied. And, taking all four
instead of bowing to me, he pranced, which
He raised two measuring sticks in the air.
"Oh my goodness!" Sancho said at this time giving a great voice. It is
possible that there is such a thing in the world, and that the
charmers and enchantments, that have bartered the good judgment of my lord
in such a crazy madness? Oh lord, lord, by whom God is, that
your mercy look for yourselves and return for your honor, and do not give credit to those
emptiness that has diminished and lost its meaning!
"Since you love me well, Sancho, you speak in a wrong way," said Don Quixote; and,
as you are not experienced in the things of the world, all the things that
They have some difficulty, they seem impossible to you; but time will pass,
as I have said again, and I will tell you some of the ones that I have down there
seen, that they will make you believe those that I have told here, whose truth does not even admit
reply or dispute.
Chapter XXIV. Where are counted a thousand trifles as impertinent as
necessary to the true understanding of this great history
Says the one who translated this great story from the original, about which he wrote
its first author Cide Hamete Benengeli, who, coming to the chapter of the
adventure of the cave of Montesinos, in the margin of it were written,
hand of the same Hamete, these same reasons:
'' I cannot imply, nor can I persuade myself, that the courageous gift
Quixote would promptly pass everything that is left in the preceding chapter
written: the reason is that all the adventures that have occurred up to now have been
recognizable and verisimilar, but this cave I find no entrance
some to be true, for going so out of line
reasonable. Well, to think that Don Quixote lied, being the most
true hidalgo and the noblest gentleman of his time, it is not possible;
not tell him a lie if he was attacked. On the other hand, I consider
that he told it and said it with all the circumstances said, and that he did not
He was able to manufacture such a great machine of nonsense in such a short space; what if
This adventure seems apocryphal, I am not to blame; and thus, without affirming it
by false or true, I write it. You, letor, for you are prudent, judge what
that it seems to you, that I do not owe nor can more; since it is considered
It is true that at the time of her end and death they say that she was portrayed, and said
that he had invented it, because it seemed to him that it was appropriate and
the adventures I had read in their stories. ''
And then he goes on, saying:
The cousin was shocked, both by the audacity of Sancho Panza and the
patience of his master, and judged that from the joy he was to have seen his
Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, although delighted, was born that condition
soft that then showed; because, if not, words and reasons
Sancho told him that they deserved to beat him to death; because it really seemed to him
that he had been daring with his lord, to whom he said:
-I, Mr. Don Quixote de la Mancha, consider the day very well spent
that with your mercy I have done, because in her I have gained four things.
The first, to have met your mercy, that I have great happiness.
The second, to have known what is enclosed in this cave of Montesinos,
with the mutations of Guadiana and the Ruidera lagoons, which will serve me
for the Spanish Ovid that I have in my hands. The third, understand the
antiquity of playing cards, which, at least, were already used in the time of
Emperor Charlemagne, as can be gleaned from your words
Grace says that Durandarte said, when, at the end of that great space
who was talking to him Montesinos, he woke up saying: `` Patience and
shuffle''; and this reason and way of speaking he could not learn delightedly,
but when it was not, in France and in the time of the aforementioned emperor
Charlemagne And this inquiry comes to mind for the other book that
I am composing, which is Virgilio Polidoro's Supplement, in the invention
of antiques; and I think that in his he did not remember to put the one of the
cards, as I will put it now, which will be of great importance, and more
claiming an author as serious and as true as Mr. Durandarte is. The
fourth is to have known with certainty the source of the Guadiana River,
hitherto ignored by the people.
`` Your grace is right, '' said Don Quixote, `` but I would like to know
May God grant you a license to print these
books, which I doubt, to whom he intends to direct them.
"There are gentlemen and greats in Spain to whom you can turn," said the cousin.
"Not many," answered Don Quixote; and not because they don't deserve it, but not
want to admit them, by not forcing themselves to the satisfaction that seems to be due to
work and courtesy of its authors. I know a prince who can supply
the lack of others, with so many advantages that, if I dare to say them,
perhaps the invidia awakened in more than four generous breasts; but stay
this here for another more comfortable time, and we are going to find where to pick up
tonight.
`` Not far from here, '' replied the cousin, `` is a hermitage, where he makes his
room a hermit, who they say has been a soldier, and is in the opinion of being
a good Christian, and very discreet and charitable as well. Along with the hermitage
he has a small house, which he has carved out at his own expense; but, with everything,
although small, it is capable of receiving guests.
"Does this hermit by chance have chickens?" asked Sancho.
`` Few hermits are without them, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because they are not the
which agora are used as those of the deserts of Egypt, who dressed
of palm leaves and ate roots from the ground. And it is not understood that by
to say well of the former I am not saying it of the former, but I mean that at the
rigor and narrowness of then do not reach the penances of those of agora;
but this does not mean that they are all good; at least, I for good ones
I judge; And, when everything runs cloudy, thank goodness the hypocrite does
It pretends good than the sinful public.
While in this, they saw that towards where they were a man was coming to
on his feet, walking briskly, and beating a male who came loaded with
spears and halberds. When he reached them, he greeted them and passed by.
Don Quixote told him:
-Good man, stop, it seems that you go with more diligence than that
male has needed.
`` I can't stop, sir, '' replied the man, `` because the weapons that
You see that here I have to serve tomorrow; and thus, it is forced to me not
stop me, and God. But if you want to know what I wear them for, in the
sale that is above the hermitage I plan to host tonight; and it is
that you are doing this same way, there you will find me, where I will tell you
wonders. And to God again.
And the male stung in such a way that Don Quixote did not
ask him what wonders he was thinking of telling them; and how he was
something curious and he was always tired of wanting to know new things, he ordered
that at the moment they parted and went to spend the night in the sale, without
play in the hermitage, where the cousin would like them to stay.
This was done, they got on horseback, and all three followed the right path of
the sale, which they reached a little before dark. Said the cousin to
Don Quixote to come to her for a drink. Sancho hardly heard this
Belly, when the rooster went to the hermitage, and the same did Don
Quixote and the cousin; but Sancho's bad luck seems to have ordered the
hermit was not at home; that this is what a sotahermit told him that in
the hermitage they found. They asked him for the expensive; replied that his lord did not
He had, but if they wanted cheap water, he would gladly give it to them.
"If I had water," answered Sancho, "there are wells on the road,
where it would have satisfied her. Ah Camacho weddings and abundance of the house
of Don Diego, and how many times do I have to miss you!
With this, they left the hermitage and went for the sale; already a little way
They ran into a young man, who was walking in front of them not very fast;
and thus, they reached him. He carried the sword on his shoulder, and in it he placed
a bundle or wrapper, apparently from her dresses; that, apparently, they should
to be the breeches or greguescos, and the blacksmith, and some shirt, because
wore a velvet robe with some glimpses of satin, and the
shirt, outside; the stockings were silk, and the square shoes, to use
cutting; the age would reach eighteen or nineteen; glad of
face, and, apparently, agile of his person. I was singing continually, to
entertain road work. When they got to him, he had just sang
one, which the cousin took by heart, which they say said:
He takes me to war
my need;
if i had money,
not out, really.
The first one who spoke to him was Don Quixote, saying:
- Very lightly you walk your grace, gentleman gallant. And where good?
Let's know, if you like to say it.
To which the waiter replied:
-Walking so lightly is caused by heat and poverty, and where I am going
it's to war.
-How poverty? asked Don Quixote; that because of the heat it may well be.
`` Sir, '' replied the young man, `` I have in this wrapping some greguescos de
velvet, companions of this robe; if I spend them on the way, I won't
I will be able to honor with them in the city, and I have no money to buy others; and,
as well for this as for praying myself, I go this way, until I reach a
infantry companies that are not twelve leagues from here, where I will
plaza, and there will be plenty of baggage to walk from there on to the
jetty, which they say must be in Cartagena. And more I want to have for love and
for lord to the king, and to serve him in war, not a bald at court.
"And does your mercy have any advantage by any chance?" asked the cousin.
-If I had served some great of Spain, or some principal
character -answered the waiter-, surely I will take her, that
has to serve the good: who usually go out to be second lieutenant or
captains, or with some good entertainment; but I, unfortunate, served
always to catarriberas and upstart people, of ration and removal so
miserable and attenuated, that in paying to starch a neck half
della; and it would be a miracle if an adventurous page reached some
even reasonable luck.
`` And tell me, for the life of me, friend, '' asked Don Quixote, `` is it possible that in
the years that it served has not been able to achieve any livery?
"They have given me two," replied the page; but, as well as the one that comes out of
some religion before professing they remove the habit and return
dresses, that's how my masters returned to me, who, after business
who came to court, went back to their houses and collected the liveries that
by mere ostentation they had given.
"Remarkable spilorchery, as the Italian says," said Don Quixote; but with
all that, may it be my good fortune to have left the court with such good
intention as it leads; because there is nothing else on earth more honored or
of more benefit than serving God first, and then his king and lord
natural, especially in the exercise of arms, by which
they achieve, if not more riches, at least, more honor than by letters,
as I have said many times; that, since they have founded more
the letters that the arms still carry an I don't know what those of the
arms to those of letters, with a yes I know what splendor found in
them, which beats them all. And what I want to say now, take it
in memory, which will be of much benefit and relief to you in your work; And it is
that, apart from the imagination of the adverse events that may come, that
The worst of all is death, and as it is good, the best of all is
dying. They asked Julius Caesar, that brave Roman emperor,
what was the best death; replied that the unthinkable, the suddenly and not
planned; and, although he responded as gentle and alien to the knowledge of the
true God, with all that, he said well, to save himself from the feeling
human; that, in case they kill you in the first faction and skirmish, or
already from an artillery shot, or blown up from a mine, what does it matter? All is
die, and the work is done; and, according to Terence, it seems more like the soldier
dead in battle alive and safe in flight; and so much fame achieves
the good soldier how much he has of obedience to his captains and to those who
they can send you. And notice, son, that the soldier is better off smelling like
gunpowder that civet, and that if old age catches you in this honorable exercise,
Even if it is full of wounds and damaged or lame, at least it will not be able to
to take it without honor, and such, that poverty will not be able to diminish it; how much
more, that order is being given how the soldiers are entertained and remedied
old and damaged, because it is not good to do with them what they usually
do those who save and give freedom to their blacks when they are old and not
can serve, and, kicking them out of the house with a free title, they make them
slaves of hunger, of whom they do not intend to save themselves but with death. AND
For now I do not want to tell you more, but go up to the haunches from my
horse to the sale, and there you will dine with me, and in the morning you will continue
the way, may God give you as good as your desires deserve.
The page did not accept the treat from the haunches, although he did accept that of having dinner with him at
the sale; and, at this time, they say that Sancho said among themselves:
-God for the Lord! And is it possible that a man who knows how to say such,
as many and as good things as you have said here, say that you have seen the
impossible nonsense that tells of the cave of Montesinos? However,
it will tell.
And in this, they came to the sale, at dusk, and not without a taste for
Sancho, to see that her master judged her for true sale, and not for
castle, like it used to. They had not entered well, when Don Quixote asked
to the innkeeper by the man with the spears and halberds; which responded
that the male was accommodating in the stable. The same did their
the cousin and Sancho, giving Rocinante the best manger and the best
stable place.
Chapter XXV. Where the adventure of the braying and the graceful one of the
puppeteer, with the memorable riddles of the seer monkey
Don Quixote's bread was not baked, as they say, until he heard and knew
the promised wonders of the man conducting arms. Went to look for
where the innkeeper had told him he was, and he found him, and told him that in everything
If I should tell him later what he had to say to him later, about what
he had asked on the way. The man replied:
-More slowly, and not standing up, you have to take the tale of my wonders:
leave me your grace, good sir, finish giving a message to my beast, that
I will tell you things that you admire.
"It is not for that reason," replied Don Quixote, "that I will help you with everything."
And so he did, making the barley for him and cleaning the manger, humility that
he forced the man to tell him with good will what he asked of him; and,
sitting on a bench and Don Quixote next to him, having for senate and
audience to the cousin, the page, Sancho Panza and the innkeeper, he began to say
this way:
- «You will know that in a place that is four and a half leagues
This sale happened that to an alderman of him, by industry and deception of a
The girl who was her servant, and this is a long story, she lacked an ass, and,
Although this alderman did the possible steps to find him, he was not
possible. Fifteen days would be spent, according to public voice and fame, - that the
the donkey was missing, when, while the losing ruler was in the plaza, another
ruler of the same town said to him: `` Give me joy, compadre, that your
ass has seemed ''. '' I'll send them to you and good, compadre, '' replied the
other - but let's know where it looked. '' `` In the mountains, '' answered the
finder-, I saw him this morning, without packet and without any rigging, and so skinny
it was a pity miralle. Cheer him before me and bring him,
but he is already so wild and sullen, that when I got to him, he left
fleeing and entered the most hidden part of the mountain. If you want us to come back
both of you to look for him, let me put this donkey in my house, then
I come back''. `` You will give me great pleasure, '' said the donkey, `` and I will try
pay it to you in the same currency. '' With these circumstances all, and of the
The same way that I am counting it, all those who are
aware of the truth in this case. In resolution, the two councilors, on foot
and hand in hand, they went to the mountain, and, arriving at the place and site where
They thought to find the donkey, they did not find him, nor did it seem for all those
contours, although they sought him more. Seeing, then, that it did not seem, said the
alderman who had seen the other: `` Look, compadre: a trace has
come to thought, with which we can undoubtedly discover this
animal, although it is stuck in the bowels of the earth, not that of the mountain;
and I know how to bray wonderfully; and if you know something, give
the fact is concluded ''. `` Do you say so much, compadre? said the other;
By God, let him not give anyone the advantage, not even the same donkeys. ''
"Now we shall see," replied the second alderman, "because I have determined
that you are going to one part of the mountain and I to another, so that
let's go around and walk around, and from time to time you will bray and I will bray
I, and it cannot be less than that the donkey hears us and answers us, if it is
It is in the bush. '' To which the owner of the donkey replied: `` I mean,
Compadre, that the layout is excellent and worthy of your great ingenuity. '' AND,
dividing the two according to the agreement, it happened that almost at the same time
They brayed, and each deceived by the braying of the other, they came to look for each other,
thinking that the donkey had already appeared; and, seeing himself, said the
loser: '' Is it possible, compadre, that it was not my ass that brayed? ''
'' It wasn't, but me, '' replied the other. "Now I say," said the owner, "that
from you to an ass, compadre, there is no difference, as far as the
braying, because in my life I have seen or heard anything more of my own. '' ''Those
praise and price, '' replied the one with the trace, `` they better concern you and
They touch you than me, compadre; that by the God who raised me that you can give
two brays ahead of the world's greatest and most proficient brayer; because
the sound you have is high; the sustain of the voice, at its time and beat;
I leave them, many and hasty, and, in resolution, I give up and
I give you the palm and I give the flag of this rare ability. '' '' Now I say
-answered the owner-, that I will have and esteem myself in more from now on, and
I will think that I know something, because I have some grace; what, since
I thought he brayed well, I never understood that the shock that came
you say. '' `` I will also say now, '' replied the second, `` that there are rare
skills lost in the world, and which are misused in those who
They don't know how to take advantage of them. '' "Ours," replied the owner, "if not
It is in cases similar to the one we are dealing with, they cannot
serve in others, and even in this plead to God that they are of benefit to us. ''
This being said, they divided again and returned to their braying, and at each step
They deceived each other and came back together, until they gave each other as a password that,
to understand that it was they, and not the ass, brayed twice, once after
other. With this, bending the brays at every step, they surrounded the entire mountain
without the lost donkey responding, not even by signs. But how had
to answer the poor and badly achieved, if they found him in the most hidden of the
forest, eaten by wolves? And, seeing him, his owner said: `` I was already amazed
I said that he did not respond, because unless he was dead, he would bray if we
hey, or it wasn't an ass; but, in exchange for having heard you braying with so much
Grace, compadre, I consider the work I have had in
look for him, although I have found him dead. '' '' It is in good hands, compadre
replied the other, `` for although the abbot sings, the
monacillo. '' With this, heartbroken and hoarse, they returned to their village,
where they told their friends, neighbors and acquaintances how much they had
occurred in search of the donkey, one exaggerating the other's grace in the
bray; all of which was known and spread to the surrounding areas.
And the devil, who does not sleep, as he is a friend of sowing and spilling quarrels and
discord everywhere, raising reeds in the wind and great
chimeras of nonada, ordered and made the people of the other towns, in
seeing some of our village, bray, as if striking them in the face with the
braying of our aldermen. The boys gave in it, which was to give in
hands and in the mouths of all the demons of hell, and the
braying from one to another town, so that the natives are known
of the Braying People, as the Negroes of
The whites; and the misfortune of this mockery has reached so much, that many
times with an armed hand and formed a squad they have come out against the scoffers
those mocked to fight, without being able to remedy it king or rock, or
fear nor shame. I believe that tomorrow or that day they will go out on the campaign
those of my town, which are those of the braying, against another place that is two
leagues from ours, which is one of those that persecutes us the most: and, to leave
well prepared, I have bought these spears and halberds that you have
viewed." And these are the wonders that I said I had to tell you, and if not
They have seemed to you, I do not know others.
And with this the good man ended his talk; and, in this, he entered through the
door of the sale a man all dressed in camouflage, stockings, greguescos and
doublet, and with a raised voice he said:
-Mr. Guest, is there an inn? That the fortune teller monkey and the altarpiece of
Melisendra's freedom.
"Such a body," said the innkeeper, "that here is Senor Mase Pedro!" Good
night is ready for us.
Forget me to say how this mase Pedro had his eye covered
left, and almost half cheek, with a patch of green taffeta, a sign that
all that side must be sick; and the innkeeper continued, saying:
"Your grace is welcome, Senor Mase Pedro." Where is the monkey and
the altarpiece, that I do not see?
`` They are coming close, '' answered the all-camouflage, `` but I have gone ahead,
to know if there is an inn.
-The Duke of Alba himself will take it away to give it to Mr. Mase Pedro
-answered the innkeeper-; The monkey and the altarpiece arrive, what people are there?
night on the sale that will pay to see you and the monkey's skills.
`` Be in good time, '' replied the man with the patch, `` that I will moderate the price, and
with the coast alone I will consider myself well paid; and I make him walk again
the cart where the monkey and the altarpiece come.
And then it went back out of the sale.
Don Quixote then asked the innkeeper what Mas Pedro that was, and what
altarpiece and what monkey was wearing. To which the innkeeper replied:
-This is a famous puppeteer, who has been around this Spot for many days.
Aragon showing an altarpiece by Melisendra, freed by the famous don
Gaiferos, which is one of the best and most well represented stories that
many years to this part in this kingdom have been seen. Also bring
with him a monkey of the rarest ability ever seen among monkeys, nor did he
imagined between men, because if they ask him something, he is attentive to what
they ask and then jumps on the shoulders of his master, and,
heard, tells him the answer to what they ask him, and Master Pedro declares it
later; and of the past things says much more than of those that are about
come; and, although not every time he succeeds in all, in the most does not err, of
in a way that makes us believe that he has the devil in his body. Two real leads
for each question, if the monkey answers; I mean, if you answer the
I love for him, after having spoken in his ear; and thus, it is believed that such
Master Pedro is delicious; and he is a gallant man, as they say in Italy and bon
companion, and give yourself the best life in the world; talk more than six and drink more than
twelve, all at the cost of his tongue and his monkey and his altarpiece.
At this, Master Pedro returned, and in a cart came the altarpiece, and the monkey,
big and tailless, with felt buttocks but not scowling; and,
Don Quixote hardly saw him when he asked him:
"Tell me, your grace, sir, guess what?" What is to become of
us?. And see here my two reals.
And he ordered Sancho to give them to Master Pedro, who answered for the
monkey, and said:
-Sir, this animal does not respond or give news of the things that are about
come; He knows something about the past, and about the present, somewhat.
"I vote for Rus," said Sancho, "don't give me a shit because they tell me what
me has passed !; because who can know better than me? And pay me
because they tell me what I know, it would be a great foolishness; but, well you know the
present things, here are my two reals, and tell me the very cute man what
My wife Teresa Panza is doing now, and what is she entertaining.
Master Pedro refused to take the money, saying:
-I do not want to receive the awards in advance, without having preceded the
services.
And, giving with the right hand two blows on the left shoulder, in a
I leaped the monkey was put on it, and, reaching the mouth to the ear, gave a tooth
with a very quick tooth; and, having made this gesture for the space of a
creed, with another leap he got down on the ground, and at once, with great
in haste, Master Pedro went to kneel before Don Quixote, and,
hugging her legs, he said:
-These legs hug, well as if hugging the two columns of
Hercules, oh famous resuscitator of the already forgotten walking
chivalry!; Oh no, how should be praised knight Don Quixote of the
Stain, spirit of the fainted, support of those who are going to fall, arm of the
fallen, staff and consolation of all the wretched!
Don Quixote was astonished, Sancho was absorbed, the cousin suspended, the
page, the braying man bent over, the innkeeper confused, and, finally, frightened
all who heard the reasons of the puppeteer, who continued saying:
-And you, oh good Sancho Panza !, the best squire and the best knight of the
world, rejoice, that your good woman Teresa is good, and this is the time in
that she is raking a pound of flax, and, by the way, has her
left side a runaway jug that fits a good reason for wine, with which
he entertains himself in his work.
-I think so very well -answered Sancho-, because she is a
blessed, and, unless I was jealous, I would not exchange her for the giantess
Andandona, who, according to my lord, was a very honest woman and very pro; And it is
my Teresa of those who do not let themselves be bad, even at the cost of their
heirs.
`` Now I say, '' said Don Quixote at this time, `` that he who reads a lot and walks
a lot, see a lot and know a lot. I say this because what persuasion was
enough to persuade me that there are monkeys in the world who guess, like
have I seen now with my own eyes? Because I am the same Don Quixote of
the Spot that this good animal has said, since some
so much in my praises; But whoever I am, I thank the
heaven, which endowed me with a soft and compassionate spirit, always inclined to
do good to all, and harm to none.
`` If I had money, '' said the page, `` I would ask Mr. Monkey what he has given me.
to happen in the pilgrimage that I take.
To which Master Pedro replied, who had already risen from the feet of
Don Quixote:
-I have already said that this beast does not respond to what is to come; Yes
I would answer, it did not matter if there were no money; that, for the service of Mr. Don
Quixote, who is present, I will leave all the interests of the world. AND
Now, because I owe it to him, and to please him, I want to put together my altarpiece and give
pleasure to those who are in the sale, without any payment.
Hearing which the innkeeper, exceedingly cheerful, pointed out the place where he
I could put the altarpiece, which at one point was made.
Don Quixote was not very happy with the riddles of the monkey, for
It seems to him that it is not on purpose that a monkey guessed, nor those to come, nor
the past things; And so, while Master Pedro arranged the altarpiece, he
Don Quixote with Sancho retired to a corner of the stables, where, without being
nobody's ears, he said:
-Look, Sancho, I have considered well the strange ability of this monkey, and
I find on my own that undoubtedly this Master Pedro, his master, must have
made a pact, tacit or express, with the devil.
-If the patio is thick and of the devil -said Sancho-, without a doubt it must be
very dirty patio; But, of what use is it to this Master Pedro to have those
patios?
-You don't understand me, Sancho: I don't want to say but that it must have been done
some concert with the devil to instill that ability in the monkey, with
may he earn from eating, and after he is rich he will give him his soul, which is what
this universal enemy pretends. And make me believe this to see that the monkey does not
responds but to things past or present, and the devil's wisdom does not
It can be extended to more, that the ones to come do not know if it is not for
guesswork, and not every time; that only God is reserved to know the
times and moments, and for Him there is no past or future, that everything is
Present. And, this being so, as it is, it is clear that this monkey speaks
with the style of the devil; and I'm amazed how they haven't accused the
Holy Office, and examining him and taking him out by virtue of who guesses;
because it is true that this monkey is not an astrologer, neither his master nor he raise, nor
they know how to raise, these figures that they call judiciary, which are used so much now
in Spain, that there is no woman, no page, or old shoemaker who does not
boasts of lifting a figure, as if it were a jack of cards from the ground,
spoiling with their lies and ignorance the wonderful truth of the
science. I know of a lady who asked one of these figures that if a
dog with a small skirt, which she had, if she would become pregnant and give birth, and how many
and what color would be the dogs that gave birth. To which the judicial lord,
after having raised the figure, he replied that the dog would get angry,
and would give birth to three dogs, one green, the other red and the other
mixture, provided that the said bitch covered herself between eleven and
twelve of the day, or at night, and whether it was on Monday or Saturday; and what
What happened was that within two days the bitch from there died, and Mr.
lifter was accredited in the place by very successful judiciary, as
It is left by all or the most lifters.
`` With all that, I would like, '' said Sancho, `` that your grace would tell Master
Pedro asked his monkey if it was true what happened to your mercy in
the Montesinos cave; that I have for myself, with forgiveness of your mercy,
that it was all a liar and a lie, or at least, things that were dreamed of.
`` Anything could be, '' answered Don Quixote, `` but I will do what you advise,
since I have to be left with I don't know what scruples.
While at this, Master Pedro arrived to look for Don Quixote and tell him that
the altarpiece was in order; that his mercy came to see him, because he
deserved. Don Quixote communicated his thought to him, and begged him to ask later
tell your monkey if certain things that had happened in the cave of
Montesinos had been dreamed or true; because it seemed to him that
they had everything. To which Master Pedro, without answering a word, returned
the monkey, and, standing in front of Don Quixote and Sancho, said:
-Look, Mr. Monkey, this gentleman wants to know if certain things that
They happened in a cave called Montesinos, if they were true or false.
And, giving him the usual signal, the monkey climbed on his shoulder
left, and, apparently speaking into his ear, then Master Peter said:
-The monkey says that part of the things that your grace saw, or happened, in the
said cave are false, and part verisimilar; and that this is what you know, and
nothing else, as for this question; and what if your mercy wanted
to know more, that next Friday he will respond to everything that is
I will ask, that for now his virtue has run out, that it will not come to him
until Friday, as said has.
`` Didn't I say so, '' said Sancho, `` that I couldn't be sure that everything
Your grace, my lord, has said of the events of the cave was
right, not even half?
"Events will tell, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; that the time,
discoverer of all things, none is left that does not bring them out to
sunlight, even if it is hidden in the bosom of the earth. And, per hour,
this is enough, and let's go see the altarpiece of good master Pedro, which for me
I must have something new.
-How any? replied Master Pedro, `` sixty thousand contains within itself this my
altarpiece; I tell your mercy, my lord Don Quixote, that it is one of the
more things to see that the world has today, and operibus credite, et non verbis;
and hands to work, it's getting late and we have a lot to do and to say and
What to show.
Don Quixote and Sancho obeyed him, and came where the altarpiece was already
laid and uncovered, filled everywhere with wax candles
lit, which made him showy and resplendent. In arriving, he got
Master Pedro inside him, who was the one who had to handle the figures of the
artifice, and outside stood a boy, servant of Master Pedro, to serve
interpreter and declarer of the mysteries of such an altarpiece: it had a
rod in hand, with which he pointed out the figures that came out.
Stalls, then, all who were in the sale, and some standing, front
of the altarpiece, and Don Quixote, Sancho, the page and the cousin in the
better places, the trujamán began to say what he will hear and see
hear or see the next chapter.
Chapter XXVI. Where the funny adventure of the puppeteer is continued, with
other things really very good
They all fell silent, Tyrians and Trojans; I mean, pending were all
those who saw the altarpiece from the mouth of the declarer of his wonders,
when a quantity of drums and trumpets were sounded from the altarpiece, and
much artillery would be fired, the rumor of which passed in a short time, and then raised
the voice of the boy, and said:
-This true story that your Mercedes is represented here is taken
to the letter of the French Coronicas and Spanish romances
that are on the lips of the people, and of the boys, through those streets. About
of the freedom that Mr. Don Gaiferos gave to his wife Melisendra, who
was held captive in Spain, held by the Moors, in the city of Sansueña, which
That is how the one that is called Zaragoza today was called then; and see you
Mercedes there, how Don Gaiferos is playing tables, according to that
that is sung:
Don Gaiferos is playing at the tables,
that Melisendra is already forgotten.
And that character that appears there, with a crown on his head and a brush on the
hands, is the Emperor Charlemagne, putative father of this Melisendra, the
Who, sulking to see the leisure and carelessness of his son-in-law, comes out to scold him; and
warn with the vehemence and zeal that he scolds him, that he seems only to
wants to find half a dozen bumps, and there are still authors who
They say that he gave it to them, and very well given; and, after having told him many
things about the danger to his honor in not seeking the freedom of
his wife, they say he told him:
"I have told you enough: look at it."
Look at your mercies also how the emperor turns his back and
leaves Don Gaiferos disgusted, who you can already see how he throws, impatient to
anger, far from itself the board and the tables, and asks hurries the weapons, and
Don Roldán, his cousin, asks to borrow his Durindana sword, and how don
Roldán does not want to lend it to him, offering him his company in the difficult
company in which it is put; but the brave angry man does not want to accept it;
Before, he says that he alone is enough to get his wife out, although
was stuck in the deepest center of the earth; and, with this, you enter
to assemble, to then set off. Your eyes turn to
that tower that seems there, which is assumed to be one of the towers
from the Alcazar of Zaragoza, now called the Aljafería; and that lady who
on that balcony it seems, dressed in the Moorish style, is the peerless Melisendra, who
from there many times he began to look at the road to France, and,
imagination in Paris and in her husband, she consoled herself in her captivity. Look
also a new case that now happens, perhaps never seen. Don't you see
that Moor who kept quiet and step by step, put his finger in his mouth,
comes from the back of Melisendra? Well, look how he kisses her in
half of her lips, and the rush she gives herself to spit, and to wipe them
with the white sleeve of his shirt, and how he laments, and is torn from regret
their beautiful hair, as if they were to blame for the curse. Look
also how that grave Moor who is in those corridors is the king
Marsilio de Sansueña; who, having seen the insolence of the Moor,
since he was a relative and great private of his, he then ordered him to arrest, and
that they give him two hundred lashes, taking him through the customary streets of the
town,
with screechers in front
and stranding behind;
And you see here where they go out to execute the sentence, even well, just not
the guilt having been put into execution; because among the Moors there is no
"transfer to the part", nor "to test and be", as between us.
"Child, child," said Don Quixote aloud at this time, "follow your
history straight line, and do not get into the curves or transversal; that,
To get a clean truth, many tests and retests are necessary.
Master Pedro also said from within:
-Boy, do not get into drawings, but do what that man tells you, that
it will be the most successful; follow your plain song, and do not get into counterpoints,
that tend to break from sotiles.
"I'll do it like that," replied the boy; and went on, saying, "This figure
which here seems to be on horseback, covered with a Gascon cloak, is the same as
Don Gaiferos, whom his wife, already avenged for the daring of the lover
Moor, with a better and calmer countenance, has taken to the viewpoints of
the tower, and talks to her husband, believing that he is some passenger, with whom
passed all those reasons and colloquia of that romance that say:
Gentleman, yes to France ides,
for Gaiferos ask;
which I am not saying now, because neatness is usually engendered
nuisance; it is enough to see how Don Gaiferos discovers himself, and that by the gestures
happy that Melisendra does, we are given to understand that she has met him, and
more now that we see it hangs down from the balcony, to get on the haunches of the
her good husband's horse. But, alas, that a
tip of the skirt of one of the ironwork of the balcony, and is pending in
the air, unable to reach the ground. But you see how the pious sky helps
in the greatest needs, because Don Gaiferos arrives, and, without looking if he
will tear or not the rich skirt, ase della, and badly her grade makes her go down to the
ground, and then, with a leap, he puts it on the haunches of his horse,
astride as a man, and commands her to hold tight and throw the
arms behind his back, so that he crosses them on his chest, because he does not
fall, because Mrs. Melisendra was not used to such
knights. You also see how the neighing of the horse signals that it is going
content with the brave and beautiful burden that he carries on his lord and his
Ms. You see how they turn their backs and leave the city, and happy and
rejoicing they take the road from Paris. You go in peace, oh peerless pair of
true lovers! Come to the rescue of your desired homeland, without
may fortune hinder your happy journey! The eyes of your
friends and relatives see you enjoy the days in quiet peace, that those of
Nestor sean, you have left of life!
Here Master Pedro raised his voice again and said:
-Llaneza, boy; do not rise up, that all affectation is bad.
The interpreter did not answer anything; earlier, he went on, saying:
-There were some idle eyes, who usually see everything, who did not see the
descent and ascent of Melisendra, of whom they reported to King Marsilio,
who then commanded to touch the weapon; and look with what haste, that the city
sinks with the sound of the bells that in all the towers of the
mosques ring.
-Not that! Don Quixote said at this time:
Inappropriate Master Pedro, because among the Moors bells are not used, but
atabales, and a kind of dulzainas that look like our shawms; and that
ringing bells in Sansueña is undoubtedly a great nonsense.
Which, heard by Master Pedro, stopped playing and said:
-Do not look at your mercy in childishness, Mr. Don Quixote, nor do you want to
things so by the end that it is not found. Are not represented out there, almost
ordinarily, a thousand comedies full of a thousand improprieties and nonsense, and, with
all that, they are running their career happily, and they are heard not only with
applause, but with admiration and all? Go on, boy, and let it say; that,
as I fill my bag, if you want to represent more improprieties that you have
atoms the sun.
"That is the truth," replied Don Quixote.
And the boy said:
-Look at how many and how lucid cavalry leaves the city in pursuit of
the two loving Catholics, how many trumpets that sound, how many dulzainas
that they play and how many drums and drums that reverberate. I'm afraid they have
to reach, and they have to tie them back to the tail of their own horse, which
it would be a horrendous spectacle.
Seeing and hearing, then, so much Moorish and so much noise Don Quixote,
It seemed good to him to give aid to those who fled; and, rising to his feet, in
aloud, said:
-I will not consent in my days and in my presence a trick is made to
such a famous gentleman and as daring in love as Don Gaiferos.
Stop, you bastard bastard; do not follow or persecute him; if not, with me
you are in battle!
And, saying and doing, he drew his sword, and with a leap stood next to
to the altarpiece, and, with accelerated and never seen fury, it began to rain
stabbed at the Moorish puppetry, knocking down some, beheading
others, spoiling this one, destroying that one, and, among many others, threw
such an ups and downs that if Master Pedro does not lower himself, he shrinks and crouches,
cut off the head more easily than if it were made of dough
Marzipan. Master Pedro shouted, saying:
-Have your grace, Mr. Don Quixote, and note that these who
demolishes, destroys and kills are not real Moors, but figurines of
pasta. See, sinner of me, who destroys me and spoils all my
tax authorities!
But it was not for this reason that Don Quixote stopped stabbing, knifing,
cuts and setbacks like rain. Finally, in less than two creeds he found
the whole altarpiece on the floor, smashed and crumbled all its
rigging and figures: King Marsilius, badly wounded, and Emperor Charlemagne,
splitting the crown and head into two parts. The Senate of the
listeners, the monkey fled through the roofs of the window, the cousin feared,
the page cowered, and even Sancho Panza himself was terrified,
because, as he swore after the storm passed, he had never seen his
lord with such foolish anger. So the general destruction of the
altarpiece, Don Quixote calmed down a little and said:
-I would like to have in front of me at this point all those who do not believe,
nor do they want to believe, of how much benefit the gentlemen are in the world
andantes: look, if I were not here present, what would be the good gift
Gaiferos and the beautiful Melisendra; surely this was already the
time that these dogs would have reached them, and they would have made them some
messy. In resolution, long live the errant cavalry on how many things
today they live on earth!
"Long live in good time," said Master Pedro in a sickly voice, "and
I die, because I am so unhappy that I can say to King Rodrigo:
Yesterday I was lord of Spain ...
and today I don't have a battlement
that I can say that it is mine!
Not half an hour, not even a half hour, that I saw myself lord of kings and
emperors, you fill my stables and my chests and sacks with infinity
horses and innumerable finery, and now I see myself desolate and dejected, poor
and beggar, and, above all, without my monkey, that in faith that first I return to
my power will make my teeth sweat; and all for the ill-considered fury
of this gentleman gentleman, who is said to protect pupils, and straighten
one-eyed, and does other charitable works; and in me it has only come to
lack his generous intention, may the heavens be blessed and praised, there
where they have their seats higher. Anyway, the Knight of the Sad
Figure had to be the one who was to disfigure mine.
Sancho Panza was touched by Maese Pedro's reasons, and said to him:
-Don't cry, Master Pedro, or lament, you break my heart; because
I let you know that my lord Don Quixote is so catholic and scrupulous
Christian, that if he realizes that he has done you some wrong, he will
He will know it and he will want to pay for it and satisfy you with many advantages.
-With Mr. Don Quixote paying me some part of the works that
has undone, he would be content, and his mercy would assure his conscience,
because it is not possible to save those who have what is foreign against the will of their
owner and does not return it.
"That's right," said Don Quixote, "but up to now I don't know that I have anything
yours, Master Pedro.
-How not? replied Master Pedro; and these relics that are by this
hard and sterile soil, who scattered and annihilated them, but the force
invincible from his mighty arm ?, and whose bodies were their bodies but mine ?, and
With whom did I sustain myself if not with them?
`` Now I have just believed, '' said Don Quixote, `` what many other
I have sometimes believed: that these charming men who persecute me do nothing but
put the figures as they are in front of my eyes, and then
they move and barter where they want. Really and truly I tell you,
Gentlemen who hear me, it seemed to me everything that happened here that
happened to the letter: that Melisendra was Melisendra, don Gaiferos don
Gaiferos, Marsilio Marsilio, and Charlemagne Charlemagne: that's why I was upset
anger, and, to fulfill my profession of knight errant, I wanted to give
help and favor to those who fled, and with this good purpose I did what you have
viewed; If it has turned out the other way around, it is not my fault, but the bad guys
they chase; and, with all this, from this mistake, although it has not come from
malice, I myself want to condemn myself to the costs: see Master Pedro what
wants for the undone figures, that I offer to pay him later, in
good and current Castilian currency.
Master Pedro bowed to him, saying:
-I expected nothing less from the unprecedented Christianity of the brave Don Quixote
de la Mancha, true helper and shelter of all those in need and
needy wanderers; and here the landlord and the great Sancho will be
mediators and appreciators, between your mercy and me, of what they are worth or
they could be worth the already undone figures.
The innkeeper and Sancho said they would do so, and then Master Pedro raised the
the ground, with his head less, to King Marsilio of Zaragoza, and said:
-You can see how impossible it is to return this king to his first being; and so I
It seems, except for better judgment, that I be given by his death, end and end
four and a half reals.
-Ahead! Don Quixote said.
`` Well, through this opening from top to bottom, '' continued Master Pedro, taking in
hands to the party Emperor Charlemagne-, it would not be much for me to ask
five reales and a cuartillo.
"It's not a little," said Sancho.
"Not much," replied the innkeeper; check out the game and give him five
real.
Give him all five and a quart, said Don Quixote, which is not in a
more to less quarters mount this remarkable misfortune; and finish quickly
Master Pedro, it is time for dinner, and I have certain suspicions of
hunger.
`` Because of this figure, '' said Master Pedro, `` who is without noses and one less eye,
which is from the beautiful Melisendra, I want, and I put myself right, two reales
and twelve maravedís.
`` The devil would still be there, '' said Don Quixote, `` if Melisendra were no longer there.
with her husband, at least, on the fringe of France; because the horse in
that they were going, it seemed to me that before it flew that it ran; and so, there is no for
what to sell me the cat for a hare, introducing me here to Melisendra
desnarigada, being the other, if it comes to hand, now relaxing in France
with her husband stretched out leg. Help God with his own to each one, sir
Master Pedro, and let us all walk with level feet and with a healthy intention. AND
go ahead.
Master Pedro, who saw that Don Quixote left and returned to his
first topic, he did not want it to escape him; and thus, he said:
-This must not be Melisendra, but one of the maidens that
they served; And so, with sixty maravedís that they give me for her I will be happy
and well paid.
In this way he was putting a price on many other shattered figures, which
They were then moderated by the two referee judges, to the satisfaction of the
parts, which reached forty reales and three cuartillos; and, furthermore,
which was later paid by Sancho, Master Pedro asked for two reales for the job
to take the monkey.
"Give them to him, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "not to take the monkey, but the monkey;" and
two hundred would I now give in happiness to whoever told me with certainty that
Mrs. Melisendra and Mr. Don Gaiferos were already in France and
among yours.
`` No one can tell us better than my monkey, '' said Master Pedro, `` but no
there will be a devil who now takes him; although I imagine that affection and hunger
They have to force him to look for me tonight, and God will dawn and let's see each other.
In resolution, the storm on the altarpiece was over and everyone dined in peace and
good company, at the expense of Don Quixote, who was liberal in every way.
Before dawn the man with the spears and halberds left, and
After dawn, they came to say goodbye to Don Quixote the cousin and
the page: the one, to return to his land; and the other, to continue his
way, for the aid of which Don Quixote gave him a dozen reales. Master
Pedro did not want to go back into any more quarrels with Don Quixote,
whom he knew very well, and thus, woke up early before the sun, and, taking the
relics of his altarpiece and his monkey, he also went to seek his adventures.
The innkeeper, who did not know Don Quixote, was so admired by his
crazy things like his liberality. Finally, Sancho paid him very well, in order
of their lord, and, saying goodbye to him, at almost eight o'clock in the day they left the sale
and they set out on their way, where we will let them go; That is how it is convenient to give
place to tell other things pertaining to the famous statement
history.
Chapter XXVII. Where he realizes who Master Pedro and his monkey were, with
the bad event that Don Quixote had in the braying adventure, which did not
It ended as he wanted and as he had planned
Enter Cide Hamete, coroner of this great story, with these words in
this chapter: '' I swear as a Christian Catholic ... ''; to what your translator
says that the swearing Cide Hamete as a Christian Catholic, being he Moor, as
without a doubt it was, he did not mean anything else but that, just as the Catholic
Christian when he swears, swears, or must swear, truth, and say it in what
I said, so he said it, as if he swore as a Catholic Christian, in what
wanted to write about Don Quixote, especially in saying who was Master
Pedro, and who the monkey guessed that all those peoples were admiring
with their riddles.
He says, then, that he will remember well, whoever has read the first part
this story, of that Ginés de Pasamonte, who, among other galley slaves,
Don Quixote gave freedom in Sierra Morena, a benefit that later went badly for him
grateful and underpaid from those evil and ill-used people. East
Ginés de Pasamonte, whom Don Quixote called Ginesillo de Parapilla, was
the one who stole Sancho Panza the redhead; that, for not having put the how or
the when in the first part, because of the printers, has given in what
understand many, who attributed to the author's short memory the lack of
press. But, in resolution, Ginés stole him, being on him sleeping
Sancho Panza, using the trace and mode that Brunelo used when, while
Sacripante over Albraca, pulled the horse from between her legs, and
then Sancho charged him, as has been told. This Ginés, then, fearful of
not to be found by justice, who was looking for him to punish him for his
infinite mischief and crimes, which were so many and such, that he himself
composed a large volume counting them, determined to go to the kingdom of Aragon and
cover the left eye, adjusting to the trade of puppeteer; I am
he knew how to play hands-on by the extreme.
So it happened that some free Christians who came from Barbary
bought that monkey, to whom he taught that, by giving him a certain sign, he
climb on the shoulder and whisper, or so it seemed, in his ear. Done this,
before he entered the place where he entered with his altarpiece and monkey, he
reported in the nearest place, or who he could best, what things
individuals would have happened in that place, and to what people; and,
remembering them well, the first thing he did was show his
altarpiece, which sometimes belonged to one story, and other times to another; but
all joyous and exhilarated and familiar. After the exhibition, he proposed the
abilities of his monkey, telling the people that he guessed all the past and
the present; but that in what was to come there was no skill. For the answer
of each question he asked for two reales, and of some he did cheaply, as he took
the pulse to the questioners; and how perhaps he reached the houses of whom he
he knew the events of those who dwelt in it, even if they did not ask him anything
for not paying him, he made the sign to the monkey, and then he said that he had told him
such and such a thing, which came out of mold with what happened. With this he charged
ineffable credit, and they were all after him. Other times, as it was so
discreetly, he responded in such a way that the answers came in handy with the
questions; and, since no one was rushing or pressing him to say how well he
his monkey, he made everyone cute, and filled their skeletons.
Just as he entered the sale, he met Don Quixote and Sancho, through whom
knowledge it was easy for him to put Don Quixote and Sancho in admiration
Belly, and all those who were in it; but it would have cost dearly if
Don Quixote lowered his hand a little more when he cut off the king's head
Marsilio and destroyed all his cavalry, as stated in the antecedent
chapter.
This is what there is to say about Master Pedro and his monkey.
And, going back to Don Quixote de la Mancha, I say that, after having left
of the sale, determined to first see the banks of the Ebro river and all
those contours, before entering the city of Zaragoza, since it gave him
time for all the much that was missing from there to the jousts. With this
intention followed his path, by which he walked two days without happening to him
something worthy of writing, until the third, when going up from a
hill, he heard a great sound of drums, trumpets, and arquebuses. To the
At first he thought that some third of the soldiers passed through that part, and
To see them he stung Rocinante and climbed the hill above; and when he was in the
summit, he saw at the foot of it, in his opinion, more than two hundred armed men of
different kinds of weapons, as if we said spears, crossbows,
parts, halberds and pikes, and some arquebuses, and many rodelas. Low
from the sidelines and approached the squad, so much that he distinctly saw the
flags, judged the colors and noticed the companies that had them,
especially one that in a banner or shred of white satin came, in the
which was painted very lively an ass like a small sardesco, the head
raised, mouth open and tongue out, in act and posture as if
was braying; around him were written in large letters
these two verses:
They did not bray in vain
the one and the other mayor.
For this insignia, Don Quixote learned that those people must be from the
town of the braying, and so he told Sancho, declaring to him what in the
banner was written. He also told him that the one who had given them news
of that case, he had erred in saying that two councilmen had been the
who brayed; but which, according to the verses on the banner, had not been
but mayors. To which Sancho Panza replied:
-Sir, there is no need to repair that, that it may well be that the councilors who
then they brayed to eventually become mayors of their town, and
thus, they can be called with both titles; how much more, that it does not
case to the truth of history be the braying mayors or aldermen,
as they brayed one by one; because he is so downright braying
a mayor as an alderman.
Finally, they met and learned how the people ran out to fight with
another that ran more than fair and what was due to good
neighborhood.
Don Quixote came to them, not with little regret from Sancho, who
he was never a friend of being on such days. The squad
they picked up in the middle, believing it to be one of their partiality. Don
Quixote, raising his visor, with gentle spirit and restraint, reached the
the banner of the donkey, and there all the most
chiefs of the army, to see him, admired with the admiration
used to falling all those who looked at him the first time. Don
Quixote, who saw them so attentive to looking at him, without anyone speaking to him or
asked him anything, he wanted to take advantage of that silence, and, breaking the
his, raised his voice and said:
-Good gentlemen, how earnestly I can, I beg you not to interrupt
a reasoning that I want to do to you, until you see that you dislike and
angry; that if this happens, with the slightest signal you give me I will put a
seal it in my mouth and gag my tongue.
They all told him to say what he wanted, to gladly
they would listen. Don Quixote, with this license, continued saying:
I, my lords, am a knight errant, whose exercise is that of arms,
and whose profession is to favor those in need of favor and go to the
needy. Days have I known your misfortune and the cause that
move to take up arms at every step, to take revenge on your enemies; and,
having passed once and many times in my understanding about your
business, I find, according to the laws of mourning, that you are deceived in having
for outraged, because no individual can outrage an entire people,
if it is not challenging him as a traitor together, because he does not know in particular who
He committed the betrayal by challenging him. Example of this we have in Don Diego
Ordóñez de Lara, who challenged all the Zamorano people, because they did not know that
only Vellido Dolfos had committed the treason of killing their king; and so,
he challenged everyone, and he played revenge and response to everyone; although it is good
It is true that Mr. Don Diego walked a little too much, and even spent a lot
ahead of the limits of the challenge, because he had no reason to challenge the
dead, to the waters, nor to the loaves, nor to those yet to be born, nor to
the other trifles that are declared there; but, wow, when the
Anger comes from the mother, it has no father, tutor or restraint that
correct. This being the case, then, that one alone cannot dishonor the kingdom,
province, city, republic or entire town, it is clear that there is no
why go out to revenge the challenge of such an affront, because it is not;
because, it would be good if the people from the town of La Reloja were killed at every step
with whom he is called, nor the cazoleros, eggplants, calves,
soap makers, nor those of other names and surnames that are out there in the mouth of
the boys and people from little more to less! It would be good, by the way, that
all these distinguished peoples ran and came, and continued to walk
made the sackbut swords to any issue, no matter how small!
No, no, God forbid or want it. The wise men, the republics
well coordinated, for four things they have to take up arms and unsheathe
swords, and put their people, lives and estates at risk: the first, for
defend the Catholic faith; the second, for defending his life, which is the law
natural and divine; the third, in defense of his honor, his family and
tax authorities; the fourth, in the service of their king, in the just war; and if you
We would like to add the fifth, which can be counted by the second, it is in
defense of their homeland. These five causes, as capitals, can be
add some others that are fair and reasonable, and that oblige us to take
weapons; but take them for trifles and for things that used to be laughable and
pastime that is an affront, it seems that whoever takes them lacks everything
reasonable speech; how much more, that taking unjust revenge, that just not
there may be some that are, it goes directly against the holy law that
we profess, in which we are commanded to do good to our enemies and
that we love those who hate us; commandment that, although it seems something
difficult to fulfill, it is only for those who have less than
God than of the world, and more of flesh than of spirit; because Jesus Christ, God
and true man, who never lied, nor could nor can lie, being
our legislator, said that his yoke was soft and his burden light; and so,
He was not to send us anything that was impossible to fulfill. So my
Gentlemen, your graces are bound by divine and human laws to
quiet.
`` The devil take me, '' Sancho said to himself at this time, `` if this my master doesn't
is a tologist; and if it is not, it seems like a dick to another.
Don Quixote took a little breath, and, seeing that they still lent him
silence, he wanted to move forward in his talk, as it happened or not
in the middle the sharpness of Sancho, who, seeing that his master stopped, took
hand for him, saying:
-My lord Don Quixote de la Mancha, who was once called the Knight of
the Sad Figure and now he is called the Knight of the Lions, he is a gentleman
very attacked, who knows Latin and romance like a bachelor, and in everything
treats and advises, proceeds as a very good soldier, and has all the laws and
ordinances of what they call the duel on the nail; and so there is no more to do
but to be carried away by what he says, and about me if they err; how much
more, that it is said that it is foolish to come just to hear a
I bray, that I remember, as a boy, that I brayed every and when
that I wanted, without anyone being at hand, and with so much grace and
property that, when I brayed, all the asses of the town brayed, and
That was not why I stopped being the son of my parents, who were very honest; and,
although by this ability he was invited by more than four of the stretched
of my town, I was not given two ardites. And, because it can be seen that I am telling the truth,
wait and listen, that this science is like swimming: that, once
learned, never forgotten.
And then, putting his hand to his nose, he began to bray so fiercely,
that all the nearby valleys rumbled. But one of those who were together
to him, believing that he was making fun of them, he raised a stick that in his hand
had, and struck such a blow with it, that, without being powerful to anything else, he struck
Sancho Panza on the ground. Don Quixote, who saw Sancho so badly beaten,
attacked the one who had hit him, spear over hand, but there were so many
those who got in the way, that it was not possible to avenge him; before, seeing
that a cloud of stones rained on him, and that a thousand
facing crossbows and no less number of arquebuses, he turned the reins to
Rocinante, and as far as his gallop could, he left between them,
committing himself with all his heart to God, to free him from that danger,
fearing at every step that a bullet would not enter his back and
come out to the chest; and at each point he caught his breath, to see if it was missing.
But the squad were content to see him flee, without shooting him. To Sancho
They put him on his donkey, barely regained his senses, and let him go after his
I love, not because he had the sense to rule him; but the rucio followed the
Rocinante's footprints, without which a point could not be found. Lengthened, then,
Don Quixote a long way, turned his head and saw that Sancho was coming, and
He attended to him, seeing that no one was following him.
Those of the squad stayed there until the night, and, for not having left
their opponents to battle, they turned to their people, rejoicing and
happy; And if they knew the ancient custom of the Greeks,
they will raise in that place and place a trophy.
Chapter XXVIII. Of things that Benengeli says that those who read him will know,
if you read them carefully
When the brave flees, the trick is discovered, and it belongs to men
wise to save for a better occasion. This truth was verified in don
Quixote, who, giving rise to the fury of the people and the bad
intentions of that indignant squadron, took to the ground, and, without
remembering Sancho or the danger he was leaving him in, he turned away as much as
It seemed to him that it was enough to be sure. Sancho followed him, crossed in his
ass, as referred to. He arrived, finally, already back in agreement, and at
arrive, he dropped from the rocina at Rocinante's feet, all anxious, all
ground and all beaten. Don Quixote got out to taste the feridas; but,
When he found him healthy from head to toe, he said with great anger:
"At such a bad time did you know how to bray, Sancho!" And where did you find
is it good to name the rope in the house of the hanged man? To braying music,
What counterpoint was there to be but sticking it out? And give thanks to
God, Sancho, since they crossed you with a stick, they did not make you the per
signum crucis with a cutlass.
`` I am not here to answer, '' answered Sancho, `` because it seems to me that I speak for
the backs. Let's go up and get away from here, I will put silence in my
braying, but not in failing to say that knights errant flee, and
they leave their good squires ground like henna, or like cyber, in power
of his enemies.
`` He who retires does not flee, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because you must know,
Sancho, that courage that is not founded on the basis of prudence is
called recklessness, and the feats of the daredevil are most attributed to good
fortune than to your mind. And so I confess that I have retired, but no
fled; and in this I have imitated many mighty men, who have saved themselves for
better times, and of course there are the full stories, which, by not
be of benefit to you or to me of pleasure, I am not referring to them now.
In this, Sancho was already on horseback, assisted by Don Quixote, who
He also went up in Rocinante, and little by little they went to ambush in a
Alameda that looked similar up to a quarter of a league from there. From when in
when Sancho gave some very deep woes and some painful groans; and,
Don Quixote asked him the cause of such a bitter feeling, he replied
that, from the tip of the spine to the nape of the brain,
in a way that made him senseless.
`` The cause of the pain must undoubtedly be, '' said Don Quixote, `` that, as
It was the stick with which they gave you long and hard, it took all of your backs,
where all those parts that hurt you come in; and if the more I caught you, the more you
hurt.
`` By God, '' said Sancho, `` your grace has brought me out of a great doubt, and
who has declared it to me in nice terms! Body of me! So covert
there was the cause of my pain that it was necessary to tell me that everything hurts
everything that hit the stick? If my ankles hurt, I could still
be that he was guessing why they hurt me, but what hurt me
ground is not much to guess. To faith, lord our master, the evil of others
hair hangs down, and every day I discover land of what little I can
to expect from the company that I have with your mercy; because if this time I
has stopped beating, another and another hundred we will return to the maintenance of
There are already other girls, that if now they have come behind my back,
later they will come to my eyes. I'd do better, but I'm a
barbarian, and I will do nothing that is good in all my life; I'd better do
I, I say again, to go back to my house, and to my wife, and to my children, and
sustain her and raise them with what God was served to give me, and not walk
after your mercy through pathless roads and paths and careers that do not
they have, drinking badly and eating worse. Well, take me to sleep! Count,
brother squire, seven feet from the ground, and if you want more, take another
so many, that in your hand is to bowl, and tend to all your good
mood; That burned I saw and powdered the first one who stitched the
errant cavalry, or, at least, the first who wanted to be a squire of
such fools as all knights errant past must have been. From
Those present I do not say anything, that, as your mercy is one of them, the
I have respect, and because I know that your mercy knows one point more than the devil
in how much he speaks and in how much he thinks.
`` I would make a good bet with you, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` that now
that you are talking without anyone coming to your hand, that nothing hurts in
your whole body. Speak, my son, all that comes to you
thought and mouth; that, in exchange for that nothing hurts you,
I will gladly resent the anger that your impertinences give me. What if
you both want to go home with your wife and children, do not allow
God that I prevent you; money you have mine: look how long it has been
third time we left our town, and look what you can and must win
every month, and pay from your hand.
`` When I served, '' Sancho replied, `` Tomé Carrasco, the father of the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco, well known to your grace, two ducats
He earned every month, apart from the food; with your grace I do not know what I can
win, since I know the knight's squire has more work to do
errant than he who serves a farmer; that, in resolution, those who
We serve farmers, no matter how much we work during the day, no matter how bad it happens,
At night we ate pot and slept in bed, in which I have not slept
after I have served at your mercy. If it has not been the short time
that we were at Don Diego de Miranda's house, and the trip I had with the
foam that I got from Camacho's pots, and what I ate and drank and slept in
Basilio's house, all the other time I have slept on the hard earth, to heaven
open, subject to what they say inclement skies, sustaining me with
slices of cheese and crusts of bread, and drinking water, now from streams, now from
sources, of which we find in those andurriales where we walk.
"I confess," said Don Quixote, "that everything you say, Sancho, is true."
How much does it seem that I should give you more than what Tomé Carrasco gave you?
"In my opinion," said Sancho, "with two reales more than your grace would add
every month he would consider me well paid. This is about my salary
job; but, as for satisfying myself to the word and promise that your
mercy has made me give me the government of an island, it would be fair that
another six reales were added to me, which would be thirty for all.
"She is very well," replied Don Quixote; and, according to the salary that you
you have indicated, 23 days ago we left our town: count, Sancho,
rat by quantity, and look what I owe you, and pay you, as I have told you,
from your hand.
-Oh, body of me! -said Sancho-, that your grace is very wrong in this
counts, because the promise of the island has to be counted from the
day that your grace promised me until the present hour when
we're.
"Well, how long has it been, Sancho, that I promised you?" Don Quixote said.
"If I don't remember correctly," answered Sancho, "there must be more than twenty
years, three days less.
Diose Don Quixote a big slap on the forehead, and began to laugh very
wins, and said:
-Well, I did not walk in Sierra Morena, nor in all the speech of our
exits, but only two months, and do you say, Sancho, that it has been twenty years that you
I promised the insula? Now I say that you want them to be consumed in your wages
the money you have mine; and if this is so, and you like it, from here
I give it to you, and enjoy it for you; that, in exchange for seeing me without so bad
Squire, I'll be happy to stay poor and broke. But tell me, prevaricator
of the squire ordinances of the errant cavalry, where have you seen
you, or read, that no knight-errant squire has put on his
Sir, how much more do you have to give me each month because it serves you?
Come in, come in, you scoundrel, mess and vestiges, you seem like everything;
enter, I mean, by the mare magnum of their stories, and if you find that some
squire has said, nor thought, what you have said here, I want you to
keys on my forehead, and, in addition, make me four sealed mamonas in
my face. Turn the reins, or the halter, to the white, and return to your
home, because a single step from here you do not have to pass later with me.
Oh well-known bread! Oh misplaced promises! Oh man you have more
of beast than of person! Now, when I thought to put you in a state, and
such, that despite your wife they will call you lordship, do you say goodbye? Now you
you go, when I came with firm and valid intention to make you lord of the
best island in the world? Anyway, as you have said other times, it is not the
honey ... etc You are an ass, and you have to be, and you have to stop when you
the course of your life ends; that for me I have that before she will arrive at her
last term that you fall and realize that you are a beast.
Sancho looked at Don Quixote from point to point, while such
he would say vituperations to him, and he was sorry so that the tears came to him.
her eyes, and with a sore and sick voice she said:
`` My lord, I confess that in order to be a complete ass, I don't need more than
line; If your grace wants to put it on, I will consider it well worn, and
I will serve as a donkey all the days that I have left of my life. Your
Please forgive me and be sorry for my youth, and note that I know little, and that
If I talk a lot, it comes more from illness than from malice; more, who errs
and it is amended, to God it is entrusted.
-I would marvel at me, Sancho, if you did not mix a refrancico in your colloquium.
Now, I forgive you, with which you start, and with which you do not show
hereinafter so friend of your interest, but you try to broaden the
heart, and encourage you and encourage you to wait for the fulfillment of my promises,
that, although it takes time, it is not impossible.
Sancho answered that he would, even if he got strength from weakness.
With this, they entered the avenue, and Don Quixote made himself comfortable at the foot of a
elm, and Sancho that of a beech tree; that these such trees and other their
their like always have feet and not hands. Sancho spent the night
painfully, because the blow was more felt with the serene. Don
Quixote passed it on in his continuous memories; but, with all that, they gave the
eyes to sleep, and at dawn they continued on their way looking for the riverbanks
of the famous Ebro, where what will be told in the chapter
coming.
Chapter XXIX. From the famous adventure of the enchanted ship
For their steps counted and to be counted, two days after they left the
Alameda, Don Quixote and Sancho arrived at the Ebro river, and seeing him was great.
Don Quixote liked it, because he contemplated and saw in him the amenity of his
banks, the clarity of its waters, the calm of its course and the abundance
of its liquid crystals, whose joyous sight renewed in his memory a thousand
loving thoughts. Especially came and went in what he had seen in the
Montesinos cave; that, since Master Pedro's monkey had told him
that part of those things were true and part lies, he was more concerned with
the true ones than the liars, well the opposite of Sancho, that all the
I had for the same lie.
Going, then, in this way, a small ship without
oars or other rigging, which was tied on the shore to a log
of a tree that was on the bank. Don Quixote looked everywhere, and
any person saw; and then, without further ado, got off Rocinante and sent
Sancho that he did the same with the rodent, and that he tied both beasts
very well, together, to the trunk of a poplar or willow that was there. Asked him
Sancho the cause of that sudden fall and that linkage. Answered
Don Quixote:
-You must know, Sancho, that this ship that is here, straight and without
to be something else to the contrary, is calling me and inviting me to enter
in it, and go there to give aid to some gentleman, or to another in need and
main person, who must be in some great trouble, because
This is the style of the books of knightly stories and of the
charming people who interfere and talk in them: when some gentleman
is engaged in some work, which cannot be freed from him except by the hand
of another gentleman, since they are distant from each other two or three
a thousand leagues, and even more, or they snatch him in a cloud or they lay in a ship
wherever you enter, and in less than the blink of an eye they take you, or by
the air, or by the sea, where they want and where their help is needed; So
that, oh Sancho, this ship is put here for the same effect; and that
it is as true as it is now in daylight; and before it passes, tie together the
Rucio and Rocinante, and to the hand of God, that guide us, that I will not stop
embark if barefoot friars asked me to.
`` Well, that's the way it is, '' answered Sancho, `` and your grace wants to take every step in
These that I do not know if I call them nonsense, there is nothing but to obey and lower the
head, attending to the saying "do what your master tells you, and sit with him
to the table "; but, with all this, as for my discharge
conscience, I want to warn your mercy that it seems to me that this
Such a boat is not one of the enchanted ones, but one of some fishermen from this river,
because the best sabogas in the world are caught in it.
This he said, while he tied the beasts, Sancho, leaving them to the protection and
shelter of the enchanters, with a lot of pain in their soul. Don Quixote
said that he had no pity for the helplessness of those animals, that the one who
would lead them down such long roads and regions would have account of
sustain them.
-I do not understand that of logicuos -said Sancho-, nor have I heard such a word in all
the days of my life.
"Long," answered Don Quixote, "means separated; and it is not
wonder that you do not understand, that you are not obliged to know Latin, as
some who presume they know it, and ignore it.
"They are already tied up," Sancho replied. What are we to do now?
-That? Don Quixote answered. Cross ourselves and carry iron; I mean,
embark and cut the mooring with which this ship is tied.
And, leaping into it, Sancho following him, he cut the line, and the ship
little by little he moved away from the shore; and when Sancho saw the work of two
rods into the river, he began to tremble, fearing his doom; but
nothing gave him more sadness than hearing the rodent graze and seeing that
Rocinante struggled to untie himself, and said to his lord:
-The redhead brays, sorry for our absence, and Rocinante tries
set free to throw himself after us. Oh dear friends,
remain in peace, and the madness that separates us from you, turned into
disappointment, return us to your presence!
And, at this, he began to cry so bitterly that Don Quixote, sulking and
angry, he said:
"What are you afraid of, you cowardly creature?" What are you crying about, butter heart?
Who is chasing you, or who is harassing you, house mouse spirit, or what
wanting, needy in the midst of the bowels of plenty? For bliss
you are walking barefoot through the rifeas mountains, but sitting on a
table, like an archduke, by the bias course of this pleasant river, whence
in a short space of time we will go out to the dilated sea? But we already have to have
gone out, and walked, at least, seven or eight hundred leagues; and if I
I had here an astrolabe with which to measure the height of the pole, I would tell you
those that we have walked; Although, or I know little, or we have already passed, or
we will pass quickly, along the equinocial line, which divides and cuts the two
opposing poles in equal distance.
"And when we get to that firewood that your grace says," Sancho asked,
How far will we have walked?
`` A lot, '' replied Don Quixote, `` because of three hundred and sixty degrees that
contains the globe, water and earth, according to Ptolemy's reckoning,
who was the greatest cosmographer known, half of us will have walked,
Coming to the line that I said
`` By God, '' said Sancho, `` your mercy brings me as a witness to what
says to a gentle person, puto and gafo, with the addition of piss, or piss, or
I do not know how.
Don Quixote laughed at the interpretation that Sancho had given to the name and
calculation and counting of the cosmographer Ptolemy, and said to him:
-You will know, Sancho, that the Spaniards and those who embark in Cádiz to go to
the East Indies, one of the signs they have to understand that they have
past the equinoctial line that I have told you is that to all who go in the
ship their lice die, without any left, not in the whole
they will find him, if they weigh him gold; and so you can, Sancho, walk a
hand for a thigh, and if you come across a living thing, we will leave this doubt; if not,
passed we have.
`` I don't believe anything, '' answered Sancho, `` but, nevertheless, I will do what you want.
mercy sends me, although I do not know why there is a need to do those
experiences, because I see with my own eyes that we have not turned away
Five varas from the shore, nor have we decanted from where the German women are
two rods, because there are Rocinante and the rucio in the proper place of the
we leave; and taken the look, as I take it now, I vote such that we do not
we neither move nor walk at the pace of an ant.
-Do, Sancho, the inquiry that I have told you, and do not worry about another, that
you don't know what coluros, lines, parallels, zodiacs, clitics are,
poles, solstices, equinoxes, planets, signs, points, measurements, of which
composes the celestial and terrestrial sphere; what if you knew all these things, or
part of them, you will see clearly what parallels we have cut, what
signs seen and what images we have left behind and we are leaving now. AND
Tornote to say that you tempt yourself and fish, that for me I have that you are
cleaner than a plain white sheet of paper.
Sancho tempted himself, and, reaching with his hand beautifully and gently towards the
left haunch, raised his head and looked at his master, and said:
-Either the experience is false, or we have not reached where your mercy says, or
with many leagues.
-Well what? asked Don Quixote, "have you come across something?"
-And even something! Sancho answered.
And, brushing off his fingers, he washed his whole hand in the river, by which
The ship was calmly gliding through the middle of the current, without
some secret intelligence moved, nor some hidden enchantress, but the
same course of water, then soft and smooth.
In this, they discovered some large watermelons that were in the middle of the river;
and Don Quixote had scarcely seen them, when in a loud voice he said to Sancho:
-You see? There, oh friend! The city, castle or fortress where
there must be some oppressed knight, or some queen, infanta or princess
ill-pained, for whose help I am brought here.
"What the hell of a city, fortress or castle does your grace say, sir?"
Sancho said. Don't you see that those are watermelons that are in the river,
where is the wheat ground?
"Hush, Sancho," said Don Quixote; that, although they appear to be watery, they are not; and
I have already told you that all things turn upside down and change from their natural being
the cutes. I do not mean that they change them from one to another being
really, but it seems so, as experience showed in the
transformation of Dulcinea, the only refuge of my hopes.
At this the ship, entered the middle of the river current, began to
walk not as slowly as up there. The millers of the aceñas, who
they saw that ship coming down the river, and that it was going to sink into the river
from the wheels, many of them swiftly left with long poles to
stop him, and, as they came out floured, and covered their faces and
clothed with flour dust, they represented bad eyesight. They gave voices
big, saying:
"Demons of men!" Where are you going? Are you desperate? What do you want,
drown and shatter on these wheels?
`` Didn't I tell you, Sancho, '' Don Quixote said at this time, `` that we had
arrived where I have to show where the value of my arm arrives? Look what of
miscreants and fucks come out to meet me, look how many vestiges I have
oppose, look how many ugly tasting coconuts make us ... Well now
you will see, miscreants!
And, standing on the boat, with loud voices he began to threaten the
millers, telling them:
-Evil channel and worst advised, leave in their freedom and free will to
the person that in that your fortress or prison you have oppressed, high or
low, of whatever luck or quality, that I am Don Quixote of the
Mancha, called the Knight of the Lions by another name, who is
reserved by order of the high heavens the happy ending of this adventure.
And, saying this, he reached for his sword and began to swing it in the air
against the millers; who, hearing and not understanding those
nonsense, they stood with their rods to stop the ship, which was already entering
in the stream and channel of the wheels.
Sancho got down on his knees, devoutly asking heaven to free him from so much
manifest danger, as he did, by industry and readiness of the
millers, who, opposing the ship with their sticks, stopped him, but did not
so that they would stop upsetting the ship and find Don Quixote and
Sancho across the water; but please don Quixote well, who knew
swim like a goose, although the weight of the weapons took him to the bottom two
times; and if it weren't for the millers, who jumped into the water and
they took both of them as much by weight, there had been Troy for both of them.
Placed, then, on the ground, more wet than thirsty, Sancho,
knees, hands together and eyes fixed on heaven, he asked God with
a long and devout prayer would free him from there ahead of the daring
wishes and rushes of his lord.
The fishermen who owned the boat arrived at this point, whom they had
pieces the wheels of the watermelons; and, seeing him broken, they undertook to undress
to Sancho, and to ask Don Quixote to pay for it; who, with great calm,
as if nothing had happened for him, he said to the millers and fishermen
that he would pay for the boat with a very nice win, on condition that they give him free
and without caution to the person or persons who were in his castle
oppressed.
`` What people or what castle does it say, '' answered one of the millers, `` man
No judgment? Would you like to take those who come to grind wheat to
are you watering?
-Enough! Don Quixote said among himself. Here it will be preaching in the desert
wanting to reduce this scoundrel to making any virtue out of prayers. And in
This adventure must have met two brave charmers, and the
one interferes with what the other tries: one gave me the boat, and the other
hit me through. God help it, that this whole world is machines and
traces, contrary to each other. I can not anymore.
And, raising his voice, he continued saying, and looking at the watermelons:
-Friends, whoever you are, who are locked up in that prison,
forgive me; that, for my misfortune and yours, I cannot get you out of
your concern. For another gentleman it must be saved and reserved this
adventure.
In saying this, he arranged with the fishermen, and paid for the boat
fifty reales, which Sancho gave them very reluctantly, saying:
-To two boats like these, we will find the entire flow at the bottom.
The fishermen and millers were amazed, looking at those two figures
so out of the use, it seemed, of the other men, and they were not quite
understand where the reasons and questions that Don Quixote addressed
He said; And, thinking them mad, they left them and gathered around their watermelons,
and the fishermen to their ranches. They returned to their beasts, and to be beasts,
Don Quixote and Sancho, and this end had the adventure of the enchanted ship.
Chapter XXX. Of what happened to Don Quixote with a beautiful huntress
Asaz melancholy and ill-tempered came to their animals knight and
squire, especially Sancho, whose soul reached the flow
of money, seeming to him that all that was taken away was taken away from
he of the apple of his eyes. Finally, without a word, they got
on horseback and turned away from the famous river, Don Quixote buried in the
thoughts of his love affairs, and Sancho of his growth, who
then it seemed to him that it was far from having him; because, maguer was
fool, it was well enough that the actions of his master, all or most,
were nonsense, and he was looking for an opportunity that, without entering into accounts or
goodbyes with his master, one day he would tear himself apart and go home.
But fortune ordered things quite the reverse of what he feared.
It happened, then, that another day, at sunset and coming out of a jungle,
Don Quixote looked out across a green meadow, and at the last of him he saw
people, and, getting close, he learned that they were hunters of arrogance.
More came, and among them he saw a gallant lady on a palfrey or
very white hacanea, adorned with green trimmings and with a
silver. The lady also came dressed in green, so bizarre and richly
that the same bizarre was transformed into her. In the left hand
He was carrying a hawk, a sign that gave Don Quixote to understand that it was some
great lady, who must be one of all those hunters, as was the
truth; and thus, he said to Sancho:
-Run, son Sancho, and tell that lady with the palfrey and the goshawk that I,
the Knight of the Lions, kisses the hands of his great beauty, and that if his
greatness gives me license, I will kiss them, and serve them as my
forces may and your highness will send me. And look, Sancho, how you talk, and have
account of not fitting a saying of yours in your embassy.
-Hallo you have been the boxer! Sancho answered. To me with that!
Yes, this is not the first time that I have taken embassies high and
grown up ladies in this life!
"If it was not the one that took Senora Dulcinea," replied Don Quixote, "I will
I do not know that you have carried another, at least in my power.
-That's true -answered Sancho-, but the good payer doesn't hurt
garments, and dinner is quickly cooked in a full house; I want to say not to me
You have to tell me or warn me about anything, that I have everything and everything is
reaches a little.
"I believe it, Sancho," said Don Quixote; Go in good time, and God guide you.
Sancho started on the run, taking the rogue out of his way, and arrived where the
She was beautiful huntress, and, getting down, placed before her of fences, said to her:
-Beautiful lady, that gentleman who looks like there, called the Knight
of the Lions, he is my master, and I am his squire, whom they call in his
Sancho Panza house. This certain Knight of the Lions, who has not been long
called the one with the Sad Figure, send for me to say to your greatness be
served to give you license so that, with your purpose and approval and
consent, he comes to implement his desire, which is none other, according to him
He says and I think, that of serving your lofty arrogance and beauty;
that in giving it your lordship will do something that is beneficial to him, and he
you will receive a very special mercy and contentment.
`` By the way, good squire, '' replied the lady, `` you have given the
your embassy with all those circumstances that such embassies
they ask. Get up off the ground, what a squire of such a great knight as he is
of the Sad Figure, of whom we already have a lot of news here, it is not fair that
be of fennels; get up, friend, and tell your lord to come a lot
at good time to use me and the duke my husband, in a house of pleasure
that here we have.
Sancho got up in admiration, both with the beauty of the good lady and with
his much upbringing and courtesy, and more than he had told her he had
news of his lord the Knight of the Sad Figure, and that if he did not
the one with the Lions had called, it must have been because he had
again. Asked the Duchess, whose title is not yet known:
-Tell me, brother squire: this is your lord, isn't he one of those who
printed a story called the ingenious hidalgo Don Quixote de la
Mancha, who has a certain Dulcinea del Toboso as mistress of his soul?
"The same is, ma'am," answered Sancho; and that squire of his who walks, or
He must be walking, in such a story, who they call Sancho Panza, it's me, yes
It is not that they bartered me into the crib; I mean, they turned me into the
stamp.
"I am very fond of all that," said the Duchess. Go, brother Panza, and
tell your lord that he be the good come and the good come to my
states, and that nothing could come to me that would make me happier.
Sancho, with this so pleasant answer, with great pleasure returned to his
master, to whom he told everything that the great lady had told him, raising
with its rustic terms to the skies its much beauty, its great grace
and courtesy. Don Quixote galloped in the saddle, got well on the
stirrups, adjusted his visor, lunged at Rocinante, and with gentle boldness
he went to kiss the duchess's hands; which, calling the duke, his
husband, he told her, as Don Quixote arrived, his entire embassy;
and both, for having read the first part of this story and having
understood by her the absurd humor of Don Quixote, with great
with pleasure and with a desire to meet him, they attended to him, with the intention of following his
humor and concede with him as soon as he told them, treating him like a gentleman
walking the days that he stopped with them, with all the ceremonies
accustomed in chivalric books, which they had read, and even
they were very fond of them.
At this, Don Quixote arrived, his visor raised; and, showing signs of getting off,
Sancho came to have his stirrup; but he was so unhappy that, at
alighting from the roe, his foot was caught in a rope of the pack, in such a way
that it was not possible to untangle him, before he was hanging from it, with his mouth and
breasts on the floor. Don Quixote, who was not in the habit of alighting without
they had the stirrup, thinking that Sancho had already come to have him,
suddenly unloaded his body, and took Rocinante's chair behind him,
must have been poorly cinched, and he and the chair came to the floor, not without
ashamed of him and of many curses that he mumbled on the unfortunate
of Sancho, who still had his foot on the corma.
The duke commanded his hunters to go to the knight and the squire,
which lifted Don Quixote, battered from the fall, and, limping and
as he could, he went to kneel before the two gentlemen; but not the duke
He consented in no way, before, getting off his horse, he went to
hug Don Quixote, saying:
-I am sorry, Mr. Knight of the Sad Figure, that the first that
Your mercy has done in my land, it has been as bad as it has been seen;
but squires' oversights are often the cause of other worse events.
"The one I have had in seeing you, brave prince," replied Don Quixote,
It is impossible to be bad, although my fall did not stop until the depths of the
abysses, because from there I will rise and get the glory of having seen you.
My squire, God damn, better unleash your tongue to say malice
that ties and cinches a chair so that it is firm; but, however I am
find, fallen or raised, on foot or on horseback, I will always be at your service
yours and that of my lady the Duchess, your worthy consort, and worthy
lady of beauty and universal princess of courtesy.
"Pass, my lord Don Quixote de la Mancha!" -said the duke-, that where
my wife, Dona Dulcinea del Toboso, is not a reason to praise others
fermosuras.
Sancho Panza was already free from the loop, and, being there
nearby, before his master answered, he said:
-It cannot be denied, but affirmed, that my lady Dulcinea del
Toboso, but where least expected the hare rises; that I have heard
to say that what they call nature is like an alkaline that makes glasses of
clay, and he who makes a beautiful glass can also make two, and three, and
hundred; I say it because my lady the duchess to fee that does not lag behind my mistress
Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso.
Don Quixote turned to the Duchess and said:
-Your greatness imagine that you had no knight errant in the world
more talkative or funnier squire than I have, and he will get me out
true if some days your great heaven wants to use me.
To which the Duchess replied:
-That Sancho the good one is funny, I estimate it a lot, because it is a sign
which is discreet; that thanks and graces, Mr. Don Quixote, as
Your mercy knows well, they do not settle on clumsy devices; and, well the good
Sancho is funny and gracious, from here I confirm him as discreet.
"And talkative," added Don Quixote.
`` So much the better, '' said the duke, `` because thank you very much cannot be said
with few words. And, because time is not running out on them, come the
Great Knight of the Sad Figure ...
`` Your highness must say about the Lions, '' said Sancho, `` that there is no longer any
Sad Figure, I don't even figure.
"Let it be the one with the Lions," the duke continued. I say the lord come
Knight of the Lions to a castle of mine that is near here, where he
will do the fostering that is precisely due to such a high person, and that I
and the duchess we usually make all the knights errant who come to him.
Already in this, Sancho had dressed and cinched Rocinante's chair well; and,
Don Quixote, and the Duke on a beautiful horse, mounted on it,
Duchess in the middle and headed for the castle. The duchess sent Sancho to
He was with her, because he liked infinitely to hear her discretion. I dont know
made Sancho beg, and interwoven between the three, and made fourth in the
conversation, with great pleasure from the Duchess and Duke, who had a great
good fortune to welcome in his castle such an errant knight and such a well-traveled squire.
Chapter XXXI. That is about many great things
Sum was the joy that Sancho carried with him, seeing himself, in his opinion, in
with the Duchess, because he imagined that he would find in his
castle what in Don Diego's house and in Basilio's, always
fond of the good life; and so, I took the chance for the mane in this
of giving himself each and every time that he was offered.
So the story tells that before going to the pleasure house or castle
arrived, the duke stepped forward and ordered all his servants to
they had to treat Don Quixote; which, as he arrived with the Duchess at
gates of the castle, instantly two lackeys or grooms came out,
dressed even in the feet of some clothes that call to lift, of very fine
crimson satin, and, taking Don Quixote in his arms, without being heard or seen,
they told them:
"May your greatness bring down my lady the Duchess."
Don Quixote did, and there were great restraints between the two about the
case; but, in effect, the Duchess's stubbornness overcame, and she did not want to
or come down from the palfrey but in the arms of the duke, saying that he
He found it worthy to give such a great knight such a useless burden. Anyway, it came out
the duke to remove it; and upon entering a large courtyard, two beautiful
maidens and threw on Don Quixote's shoulders a large cloak of
very fine scarlet, and in an instant all the corridors of the
courtyard of the servants and maids of those gentlemen, saying with loud voices:
"Well come the cream of the knights errant!"
And all, or most of them, poured bottles of fragrant water on Don Quixote and
about the dukes, for all of which Don Quixote admired; and that was the
first day that of everything in everything knew and believed to be a knight errant
true, and not fantastic, seeing himself treated the same way he had
read about such gentlemen in past centuries.
Sancho, abandoning the rodent, sewed himself with the duchess and entered the
Castle; and, conscientiously leaving the donkey alone, he
came to a reverend duenna, who with others to receive the duchess had
came out, and in a low voice said:
-Mrs. González, or how is your grace of your mercy ...
"My name is Dona Rodríguez de Grijalba," replied the owner. What is what
do you command, brother?
To which Sancho replied:
-I would like your grace to make me go out to the castle gate,
where he will find a white ass of mine; may your mercy be served to send him
put, or put him, in the stable, because the poor thing is a little
fearful, and you will not find yourself alone in any way.
`` If the master is as discreet as the waiter, '' replied the owner,
we're! Come on, brother, a lot of congratulations for you and for whoever here you
trujo, and take account of your donkey, that the owners of this house
we are used to such haciendas.
"Well indeed," answered Sancho, "I have heard my lord say that it is
dowser of stories, telling that of Lanzarote,
when he came from Brittany,
what ladies cured of him,
and owners of their rocino;
and that in the particular of my ass, that I did not exchange him with the nag of the
Mr. Lanzarote.
`` Brother, if you are a minstrel, '' replied the owner, `` keep your graces for
where they seem and they pay you, that you can only take one
fig.
"Still good," answered Sancho, "which will be very mature, because it will not lose its
At the mercy of the quinola of his years for a point less!
`` Son of a bitch, '' said the owner, already fired up in anger, `` if I'm old or
no, I'll give the bill to God, but not to you, scoundrel, sick of garlic.
And this he said so loudly that the Duchess heard it; and, going back and seeing
the owner so excited and her eyes so fierce, she asked him with whom
there were.
`` Here I have them, '' replied the owner, `` with this good man, who has asked me
I strongly urge you to put one of your donkeys in the stable
to the castle gate, bringing ome for example that they did so I do not know
where, that some ladies cured a certain Lanzarote, and some dueñas his
rocino, and, above all, for good term he has called me old.
`` That was an affront to me, '' replied the Duchess, `` more than how many
could you tell me.
And, speaking with Sancho, he said:
-Advert, Sancho friend, that Dona Rodríguez is very young, and that those
You play more by authority and custom than by the years.
`` Bad are the ones I have left to live, '' answered Sancho, `` if I said it for
so much; I only said it because the love I have for my donkey is so great,
that it seemed to me that I could not entrust him to a more charitable person than the
Mrs. Doña Rodríguez.
Don Quixote, who heard everything, said to him:
"Are these talks, Sancho, for this place?"
`` Sir, '' answered Sancho, `` each one has to speak of his need wherever
that it be; here I was reminded of the rodent, and here I spoke of him; and if in the
I will remember the stable, there I will speak.
To which the duke said:
- Sancho is very in the certain thing, and it is not necessary to blame him in anything; to the rucio
will give you a message to ask, and don't worry Sancho, he will be treated like a
his very person.
With these reasonings, with pleasure to all but Don Quixote, they came to the
high and they entered Don Quixote into a room adorned with very rich fabrics of
gold and brocade; six maidens disarmed him and served as pages, all
informed and advised of the Duke and Duchess of what they had to
do, and how they were to treat Don Quixote, so that he imagined and saw
that they treated him like a knight errant. Don Quixote remained, after
disarmed, in his narrow greguescos and in his camouflage doublet, dry, tall,
stretched out, with his jaws, which on the inside were kissing each other;
figure that, to ignore the maidens who served him by hiding the
laughter -which was one of the precise orders that their masters had given them-,
burst laughing.
They asked him to let himself be undressed for a shirt, but he never consented,
saying that honesty seemed just as good on knights errant as
bravery. Still, he said to give the shirt to Sancho, and, locking himself
with him in a stable where he was a rich bed, he undressed and dressed the
shirt; and, seeing himself alone with Sancho, he said:
Tell me, modern crook and ancient fool: does it seem right to dishonor and
affronting a landlady as venerable and as worthy of respect as that one?
Were those times to remember the dart, or gentlemen are these to
let the beasts pass badly, treating their owners so elegantly? By
who God is, Sancho, that you report, and that you do not discover the thread of
so that they realize that you are a villain and rude fabric
tissue. Look, sinner of you, that as much as the Lord is had, how much
has more honest and well-born servants, and that one of the advantages
greater than princes bring to other men is that they use
servants as good as they. Do you not notice, distressed of you, and
unfortunate of me, that if they see that you are a rude villain, or a
funny goofy, they'll think I'm some ravenclaw, or some
knight of mohatra? No, no, Sancho friend, run away, run away
unconvinced, that whoever stumbles into talkative and funny, at the first
kick falls and hits the wretched scoundrel. Hold your tongue, consider and
ruminate the words before they leave your mouth, and notice that we have
come to a part where, with the favor of God and the courage of my arm, we must
to come out improved in third and fifth in fame and in property.
Sancho promised with many truths to sew his mouth, or bite the
language, before speaking a word that was not very on purpose and well
considered, as he commanded, and that he neglected about such, that
never through him would it be discovered who they were.
Don Quixote dressed, put on his baldric with his sword, put on the shawl of
scarlet in tow, he put on a green satin hat that the maidens gave him
gave, and with this adornment he went to the great room, where he found the
maidens on the wing, as many on one side as on the other, and all with
dressing to give him hand water, which they gave him with many obeisances and
ceremonies.
Then twelve pages arrived with the maestresala, to take him to eat, which
the lords awaited him. They caught him in the middle, and, full of pomp and
Majesty, they led him to another room, where a rich table was set with
only four services. The Duchess and Duke came out of the door of the
room to receive him, and with them a grave ecclesiastic, of those who govern
the houses of princes; those who, as princes are not born, are not
they succeed in teaching how those who are must be; Destos that they want
May the greatness of the great be measured by the narrowness of their spirits;
dests that, wanting to show those who govern to be limited,
they make them miserable; of these, I say it must be the grave
religious who with the dukes went out to receive Don Quixote. There were a thousand
courteous restraints, and, finally, catching Don Quixote in the middle,
they went to sit at the table.
The duke invited Don Quixote with the head of the table, and although he
He refused, the duke's importunations were so great that he had to take it.
The clergyman sat in front, and the duke and duchess on either side.
Sancho was present at all, stunned and astonished to see the honor that his
lord those princes made him; and, seeing the many ceremonies and
prayers that passed between the duke and don Quixote to make him sit down
head of the table said:
-If your grants give me a license, I will tell you a story that happened in my
town about desto of the seats.
Scarcely had Sancho said this, when Don Quixote trembled, doubtlessly believing
Someone who had to say something stupid. Sancho looked at him and understood him, and
said:
Do not fear your mercy, my lord, that I go out of control, or say anything that
do not come too bareback, I have not forgotten the advice that little has
Your mercy gave me about speaking a lot or a little, or good or bad.
"I don't remember anything, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; say what
you want, as you say soon.
"Well, what I mean," said Sancho, "is so true that my lord don
Quixote, who is present, will not let me lie.
`` For me, '' replied Don Quixote, `` you lie, Sancho, how much you want, that I
I will not go to hand, but look what you are going to say.
-I have it so looked at and looked at, that the one who rings out is safe, as
it will be seen by the work.
`` It will be well, '' said Don Quixote, `` that your greatness sends
this fool, who will say a thousand shits.
`` For the life of the duke, '' said the duchess, `` Sancho will not depart from me.
One point: I love him very much, because I know that he is very discreet.
`` Discreet days, '' said Sancho, `` long live your sanctity for the good credit you
it has of me, although there is not in me. And the story I want to tell is this:
«A nobleman from my town invited, very rich and important, because he came from the
Álamos de Medina del Campo, who married Mencia de Quiñones, who was
daughter of Don Alonso de Marañón, knight in the habit of Santiago, who
drowned in La Herradura, for whom there was that quarrel years ago in our
place, that, to what I understand, my lord Don Quixote was found in it,
where Tomasillo the Mischievous, the son of Balbastro the
blacksmith ... 'Is not all this true, lord our master? Say it, for your
life, because these gentlemen do not take me for some liar talker.
`` Until now, '' said the ecclesiastic, `` I think you are more talkative than
liar, but from now on I don't know what I'll have you for.
-You give so many witnesses, Sancho, and so many signs, that I can't stop
say that you must tell the truth. Go ahead and shorten the story, because
you've been on your way to not finishing in two days.
"You must not shorten such," said the Duchess, "to please me; before, you
It has to tell the way it knows, even if it doesn't finish in six days; that
If there were so many, they would be for me the best that I would have carried in my
life.
"" I say, then, my gentlemen, "Sancho continued," that this gentleman, that I
I know how to my hands, because there is not from my house to yours a shot of
crossbow, invited a poor but honest farmer. "
`` Go ahead, brother, '' said the priest at this time, `` what path you are taking from
not stop with your story until the other world.
"Less than half will stop, if God is served," answered Sancho. "AND
So, I say that, when such a farmer arrived at the house of the said gentleman
convidator, what a good ground his soul has, which is already dead, and by more signs
They say that he made a death of an angel, that I was not present, that
he had gone at that time to mow Tembleque ... »
-For your life, son, that you return quickly from Tembleque, and that, without
bury the nobleman, if you do not want to do more funerals, finish your
story.
"" It is, then, the case, "replied Sancho," that, when the two of them were to settle
the table, it seems that now I see them more than ever ... »
The dukes received great pleasure from the dislike of taking good
religious of the delay and pauses with which Sancho told his story, and don
Quixote was consuming himself in anger and rage.
"" I mean, like this, "said Sancho," that, being, as I said, the two of us
sit at the table, the farmer insisted that the hidalgo take the
head of the table, and the hidalgo also insisted that the farmer
take, because in his house he had to do what he ordered; but
farmer, who boasted of being courteous and well-bred, never wanted, until the
hidalgo, pouting, putting both hands on his shoulders, made him sit down
by force, saying to him: `` Sit down, you majagranzas, that wherever I go
feel will be your bedside ''. » And this is the story, and in truth I believe
that it has not been brought here out of purpose.
Don Quixote put on a thousand colors, which on the dark were marbling and
they seemed; The gentlemen hid their laughter, because Don Quixote had not finished
cumming, having understood Sancho's malice; and, for changing the conversation
and make Sancho not continue with other nonsense, asked the Duchess
to Don Quixote that what news did he have of Senora Dulcinea, and that if he had
sent those days some presents of giants or miscreants, because no
he could fail to have conquered many. To which Don Quixote replied:
"My lady, my misfortunes, although they had a beginning, will never have an end."
Giants I have conquered, and troubles and miscreants I have sent him, but where
they had to find her, if she is enchanted and back in the ugliest farmhouse that
imagine can you?
`` I don't know, '' said Sancho Panza, `` he seems to me the most beautiful creature in the world.
world; At least, in the lightness and in jumping well I know that it will not give
she leads to a vaulter; in good faith, Madame Duchess, so it jumps from
the ground on a donkey like a cat.
"Did you see her delighted, Sancho?" asked the duke.
-And as if I have seen it! Sancho answered. Well who the hell but me
Was he the first to fall into the ailment of enchantment? So delighted is she
like my father!
The ecclesiastic, who heard about giants, troubles and charms, fell
realizing that this must be Don Quixote de la Mancha, whose
history read the duke ordinarily, and he had reprimanded many
sometimes, telling him that it was nonsense to read such nonsense; and, finding out
what he suspected to be true, with great anger, speaking with the duke,
said:
-Your Excellency, my lord, has to give an account to Our Lord of what
what does this good man do. This Don Quixote, or Don Tonto, or what's his name,
I imagine that he must not be as foolish as Your Excellency wants
whatever, giving the hand opportunities to carry out their nonsense and
voids.
And, turning the talk to Don Quixote, he said:
-And you, pitcher soul, who has fitted you into the brain that you are
errant knight and that you defeat giants and catch evildoers? Walk in
good hour, and in such a time you are told: return to your house, and raise your
children, if you have them, and take care of your property, and stop wandering
around the world, blowing the wind and making those who know you and not
know. Where, nora tal, have you found that there was and is now
knights errant? Where are there giants in Spain, or scoundrels in the
Mancha, neither enchanted Dulcineas, nor all the caterva of the simplicities
What about you?
Don Quixote was attentive to the reasons of that venerable man, and, seeing
who was already silent, without respecting the dukes, with an angry face and
flustered face, he stood up and said ...
But this chapter answer by itself deserves.
Chapter XXXII. From the answer that Don Quixote gave to his reproach, with
other serious and funny events
So Don Quixote raised to his feet, trembling from head to foot like
flustered, with a hasty, troubled tongue, he said:
-The place where I am, and the presence before whom I am and the respect that
I always had and have the state that your professed mercy have and tie the
hands of my righteous anger; and, both from what I have said and from knowing that
everyone knows that the arms of the robed are the same as those of the
woman, who are the tongue, I will enter with mine in the same battle with your
mercy, from whom one should expect before good advice than infamous
vituperation. The holy and well-intentioned reprimands others
circumstances require and other points ask: at least, having
reprimanded in public and has so harshly passed all the limits of the
good rebuke, for the former better settle on the softness that
about roughness, and it is not right that, without having knowledge of sin that
he rebukes himself, calling the sinner, without further ado, foolish and foolish. But,
tell me your mercy: by which of the nonsense that has seen me
He condemns and reproaches, and orders me to go home to have an account in the
government of it and my wife and my children, without knowing if I have it or
I have? Is there nothing else but a bit of time to enter the houses of others
govern their owners, and, some having been raised in the cramped
pupil, having seen no more world than that which can be contained in twenty or
thirty leagues from the district, go round to give laws to the cavalry and
judging from knights errant? Is this a vain assumption or is it
wasted time that is spent wandering the world, not looking for the
gifts from him, but the rough edges where the good ones climb to the seat of the
immortality? If the gentlemen, the magnificent ones, the
Generous, the highly born, consider it an unspeakable affront; but
that the students consider me to be sandio, who never entered or stepped on
the paths of cavalry, I am not given a shit: I am a gentleman and
Knight I must die if it pleases the Most High. Some go through the wide field of
arrogant ambition; others, by that of slavish and low adulation; others,
by that of deceptive hypocrisy, and some, by that of true
religion; but I, bowed from my star, I go down the narrow path of the
errant cavalry, for whose exercise I despise the ranch, but not the
honor. I have satisfied grievances, straightened one-eyed, punished
insolence, defeated giants and trampled vestiges; I am in love, no
more than because it is necessary that the knights errant be; and, being so,
I am not one of the vicious lovers, but of the platonic continents. My
I always direct my intentions to good ends, which are to do good to
all and bad to none; If the one who understands this, if the one who works, if the
what this is about deserves to be called a fool, tell your greatness, duke
and duchess excellent.
"Good, by God!" Sancho said. Say no more your grace, lord and master
mine, in your compost, because there is no more to say, no more to think, no more
to persevere in the world. And more, that, denying this man, as he has denied,
that there has not been in the world, nor are there, knights errant, how much
who does not know any of the things that he has said?
"By any chance," said the ecclesiastic, "are you, brother, that Sancho Panza
What do they say, to whom your master has promised an island?
"Yes, I am," answered Sancho; and I am the one who deserves it as well as another
any; I am the one who "join the good guys and you will be one of them", and I am
of those "not with whom you are born, but with whom you peace", and of those "who to
a good tree huddles over, a good shade shelters him. "I have gotten close to good
Sir, and I have been in his company for many months, and I must be someone else like him,
God willing; and long live him and long live me: that neither he will lack empires that
send or me islands to rule.
`` No, by the way, my friend Sancho, '' said the duke at this time, `` that I, in
name of Mr. Don Quixote, I send you the government of one that I have of
odd, no small quality.
`` Get on your knees, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` and kiss His feet.
Excellency for the mercy he has done you.
Sancho did so; which, seen by the ecclesiastic, rose from the
table, also sulking, saying:
-Because of the habit I have, I'm about to say that it is so good.
Excellence like these sinners. See if they must not be crazy, well
the sane canonize their follies! Your Excellency stay with them;
that, as long as they are at home, I will be in mine, and I will excuse myself
to reprehend what I cannot help.
And, without saying more or eating more, he left, without being stopped by the
prayers of the dukes; although the duke did not say much to him, stopped from laughing
that his impertinent anger had caused him. He finished laughing and said to don
Quixote:
-Your grace, Lord Knight of the Lions, you have answered so
highly that there is nothing left to satisfy since, although it seems
grievance, it is not in any way; because, just as they do not aggravate
women, ecclesiastics do not offend, as your mercy knows best.
`` Yes, '' answered Don Quixote, `` and the reason is that he who cannot be
aggrieved cannot harm anyone. Women, children and
ecclesiastical, as they cannot defend themselves, even if they are offended, they cannot
be affronted; because between the injury and the affront there is this difference,
As Your Excellency knows best: the affront comes from the one who
it can do, and does and sustains it; the grievance can come from any
part, without affront. Be an example: one is in the street neglected,
ten arrive with an armed hand, and, beating him with sticks, he puts his hand to the sword and
does his duty, but the crowd of opponents opposes him, and does not
he lets out with his intention, which is to take revenge; this such is aggrieved,
but not affronted. And the same will confirm another example: one is back from
back, another comes and beat him, and when he gives it to him he runs away and does not wait, and
the other follows him and is not enough; This one who received the sticks, received a grievance,
but it does not insult, because the insult must be sustained. If the one who gave
the sticks, although he gave them to hurtacordel, put his hand to his sword and
he was left, making a face to his enemy, the beaten
wronged and affronted together: wronged, because they gave him treachery;
affronted, because the one who gave him sustained what he had done, without turning
back and on foot. And so, according to the laws of damn duel, I can
be offended, but not affronted; because children do not feel, nor
women, neither can flee, nor do they have to wait, and the same
constituted in the sacred religion, because these three kinds of people
they lack offensive and defensive weapons; and so, although naturally they are
forced to defend themselves, they are not to offend anyone. And, although little has
I said that I could be offended, now I say that no, in no way,
because he who cannot receive insult, less can give it; by which
reasons I should not feel, nor do I feel, those that that good man has
saying; I just want you to wait a little bit, to let you understand in the
error that is in thinking and saying that there has not been, nor are there,
knights errant in the world; that if Amadís heard it, or one of the
infinities of his lineage, I know he did not do well at his mercy.
`` I swear that well, '' said Sancho, `` they would have given him a stab
opened from top to bottom like a pomegranate, or like a very ripe melon.
How beautiful they were to suffer such tickles! For my holy one,
that I am certain that if Reinaldos de Montalbán had heard these
reasons to the little man, mask would have given him not to speak more in three
years. No, but take it with them and see how it escaped from their hands!
The duchess laughed when she heard Sancho speak, and in her opinion he
he thought he was funnier and crazier than his master; and there were many in that
time that they were of the same seem. Finally, Don Quixote calmed down, and
the food ran out, and, in lifting the tablecloths, four arrived
maidens, one with a silver platter, the other with a ewer,
also of silver, and the other with two very white and very rich towels to the
shoulder, and the fourth uncovered the arms halfway, and in their
white hands - which were undoubtedly white - a round ball of soap
Neapolitan. The one with the fountain arrived, and with gentle grace and ease
he fitted the fountain under Don Quixote's beard; which, without speaking
word, admired of such a ceremony, believing that it must be the custom of
that land instead of hands wash their beards, and so he held out his
as much as he could, and at the same point the ewer began to rain, and the
The soap maiden fingered his beard very hastily, raising flakes
of snow, that the suds were no less white, not only because of the
beards, but all over the face and eyes of the obedient knight,
so much so that they were forced to close.
The duke and duchess, who knew nothing about this, were waiting
where was such an extraordinary lavatory to end? The barbera maiden,
when he had him with a handful of soap, he pretended that he had run out
the water, and ordered the ewer to go for it, that Mr.
Quixote would wait. He did so, and Don Quixote was left with the strangest
figure and more to make you laugh than you could imagine.
All those present looked at him, there were many, and how they saw him
with half a rod of neck, more than moderately brown, eyes closed and
the beards full of soap, it was great marvel and a lot of discretion to be able to
hide laughter; the maidens of mockery had their eyes lowered, without
dare to look at their lords; they were frolicking with anger and laughter in the
body, and did not know what to turn to: or to punish the daring of
girls, or give them a prize for the pleasure they received from seeing Don Quixote
of that luck.
Finally, the ewer maiden came, and they finished washing Don
Quixote, and then the one who brought the towels cleaned and wiped him very
quietly; and, making all four at the same time a large and deep
bow and bow, they wanted to go; but the duke, because don Quixote
do not fall for the mockery, he called the maiden of the fountain, saying:
-Come and wash me, and see that your water does not run out.
The girl, sharp and diligent, arrived and placed the fountain on the Duke as well as on Don
Quixote, and, hurrying, they washed and soaped him very well, and, leaving him
lean and clean, bowing they left. Later it was learned that there was
The duke swore that if they did not wash him like Don Quixote, he would have to
punish their self-importance, which they had discreetly amended with
to have soaped him.
Sancho was attentive to the ceremonies of that lavatory, and said among himself:
-God help me! If it is also customary in this land to wash the beards to
squires like knights? Because, in God and in my soul that
I really need it, and even if they shaved them with a razor, I would have it more
benefit.
-What do you say between yourselves, Sancho? asked the Duchess.
`` I say, madam, '' he answered, `` that in the courts of the other princes
I have always heard it said that when lifting the tablecloths they give water to the hands,
but it does not bleach beards; and that is why it is good to live long, to see
much; although they also say that he who lives long lives badly has to
pass, since going through a lavatory of these before is a pleasure that
job.
`` Don't be sorry, friend Sancho, '' said the Duchess, `` I'll make my
Maidens wash you, and even put you in laundry, if necessary.
`` I'm happy with my beards, '' answered Sancho, `` for now at least, that
in time, God said what will be.
`` Look, maestresala, '' said the Duchess, `` what good Sancho asks, and
carry out his will to the letter.
The headmaster replied that Mr. Sancho would be served in everything, and with
this went to eat, and took Sancho with him, remaining at the table the
Dukes and Don Quixote, speaking on many and diverse things; but all
concerning the exercise of arms and errant cavalry.
The duchess begged Don Quixote to outline and describe her, since it seemed
have happy memory, the beauty and features of Mrs. Dulcinea of ​​the
Toboso; which, according to what fame proclaimed of her beauty, had for
understood that it must be the most beautiful creature in the world, and even of all
Stain. Don Quixote sighed, hearing what the Duchess was commanding him, and said:
-If I could take my heart out and put it before the eyes of your
greatness, here, on this table and on a plate, will take my job away
language of saying what can hardly be thought, because Your Excellency
see in him all portrayed; but, what is it for me now to delineate
and describe point by point and part by part the beauty of the unparalleled
Dulcinea, being a burden worthy of other shoulders than mine, company in
who had to take care of the brushes of Parrasio, Timantes and Apelles, and
the burins of Lysippus, to paint and engrave it on boards, marbles and
bronzes, and the Ciceronian and Demostine rhetoric to praise her?
`` What does demostina mean, Senor Don Quixote? '' Asked the Duchess, `` that
Is it a word that I have not heard in all the days of my life?
`` Demostine rhetoric, '' answered Don Quixote, `` is the same as saying rhetoric.
of Demosthenes, as Ciceronian, of Cicero, who were the two greatest
rhetoricians of the world.
"It is so," said the duke, "and you have been dazzled by such a question."
But, with all that, Mr. Don Quixote would give us great pleasure if we
painted; that surely, even if it is in scratch and sketch, that she
Come out such, that the most beautiful have invidia.
`` If I did, by the way, '' answered Don Quixote, `` if I hadn't
erased from the idea the misfortune that recently happened to him, which is such, that
I am more to mourn her than to describe her; because they will know
your greatness that, going the past days to kiss his hands, already
receive your blessing, approval and license for this third outing,
I found another of the one I was looking for: I found her enchanted and turned from a princess into
peasant woman, from beautiful to ugly, from angel to devil, from fragrant to pestiferous,
from well spoken in rustic, from restful to jumping, from light to darkness,
and, finally, of Dulcinea del Toboso in a villain of Sayago.
-God help me! In a great voice, the duke said at this moment. Who
Has he been the one who has done so much harm to the world? Who has taken from him
the beauty that pleased him, the grace that entertained him, and the honesty that
credited him?
-Who? Don Quixote answered. Who can it be but some evil
charming of the many invidious who haunt me? This cursed race
born into the world to darken and annihilate the exploits of the good, and
to give light and lift the deeds of the wicked. They have haunted me
lovely, lovely will haunt me and lovely will haunt me until
find me and my high knights in the deep abyss of oblivion; and
in that part they harm and hurt me where they see that I feel it the most, because
To take his lady from a knight-errant is to take away his eyes with which he looks,
and the sun with which it is illuminated, and the sustenance with which it is sustained. Other
I have said it many times, and now I say it again: that the gentleman
The errant without a lady is like the tree without leaves, the building without a foundation, and the
a disembodied shadow of whoever is caused.
"There is nothing more to say," said the Duchess; but yes, with all that, we have to
give credit to the story that Mr. Don Quixote from a few days ago to this
part has come to light in the world, with general applause from the people,
it is concluded, if I remember correctly, that your grace has never seen the
Mrs. Dulcinea, and that this lady is not in the world, but is a lady
fantastic, that your grace engendered and bore her in her understanding, and the
he painted with all those graces and perfections that he wanted.
"There is much to say about that," answered Don Quixote. God knows if there is
Dulcinea or not in the world, or if she is fantastic or not she is fantastic; and you are
They are not one of the things to be investigated through to completion. Nor I
I begot or gave birth to my lady, since I contemplate her as it should be
a lady that contains within herself the parts that can make her famous in all
those of the world, as they are: beautiful, without blemish, serious without pride, loving
honestly, grateful for courteous, courteous for well-maid, and,
finally, high by lineage, because on the good blood shines
and beauty prevails with more degrees of perfection than in the beautiful
humbly born.
"Yes," said the duke; but Mr. Don Quixote has to give me leave
so that he says what forces me to tell the story that of his exploits I have
read, from which it follows that, since it is granted that there is Dulcinea, in
El Toboso or outside of him, and may it be beautiful in the highest degree that your mercy
He paints her for us, in the highness of the lineage he does not run even with the
Orianas, with the Wingstrajareas, with the Madásimas, nor with others of this kind,
who are full of stories that your mercy well knows.
"To that I can say," replied Don Quixote, "that Dulcinea is the daughter of his
works, and that the virtues adore the blood, and that in more it is to be esteemed and
have a humble virtuous than a vicious uplifted; the more, what
Dulcinea has a shred that can lead her to be queen of crown and brush;
that the merit of a beautiful and virtuous woman to make greater
miracles is spread, and, although not formally, it has in itself virtually
locked up greater fortunes.
"I say, Senor Don Quixote," said the Duchess, "that in everything that you
Grace says he goes with a lead foot, and, as they say, with the probe in the
hand; and that from here on I will believe and make all of me believe
house, and even to the Duke my lord, if need be, that there is Dulcinea in the
Toboso, and who lives today, and is beautiful, and mainly born and
deserving that such a gentleman as Mr. Don Quixote serve her; that
It is the most that I can and do not know how to cost. But I can't help but form a
scruple, and have some I don't know what annoyance against Sancho Panza: the
scruple is that the aforementioned story says that this Sancho Panza found
this Mrs. Dulcinea, when on behalf of your mercy she brought her a
epistle, tossing a sack of wheat, and, by more signs, says that it was
blond: which makes me doubt the highness of his lineage.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-My lady, your greatness will know that all or more things than me
happen to me go outside the ordinary terms of which to the others
knights errant happen, or are already directed by wanting
inscrutable of the fates, or already they come directed by the malice of some
charming invidious; and, as it is already ascertained that all or most
Knights-errant and famous, one has the grace of not being able to be enchanted,
another to be of such impenetrable flesh that he cannot be hurt, as
was the famous Roldán, one of the twelve Peers of France, who is told
that it could not be affected except by the sole of the left foot, and that this
it had to be with the point of a fat pin, and not with another kind of weapon
some; and thus, when Bernardo del Carpio killed him in Roncesvalles, seeing
who could not hit him with iron, lifted him from the ground between his arms and
He drowned him, remembering then the death that Hercules gave to Anteon,
that fierce giant who claimed to be the son of the Earth. I want to infer from what
That said, it could be that I had some grace about these, not the no
to be able to be ferido, because many times experience has shown me that I am
of soft flesh and not at all impenetrable, nor that of not being able to be enchanted,
that I have already seen myself in a cage, where everyone was not
powerful to lock me up, if it weren't for the forces of enchantments; but then
I got rid of that one, I want to believe that there must not be another one that
start; and thus, seeing these charming ones that with me they cannot use
of your bad tricks, take revenge on the things that I love the most, and want
take my life by mistreating Dulcinea's, for whom I live; and so I think
that when my squire took my embassy to her, they turned her into a villain
and occupied in such low exercise as is the one of making wheat; But I already have
I said that that wheat was neither rubión nor wheat, but grains of pearls
oriental; and to prove this truth I want to say to your magnitudes
how, coming just a short time ago through Toboso, I could never find the palaces of
Dulcinea; and that another day, having seen her Sancho, my squire, in his own
figure, which is the most beautiful in the world, she seemed to me a rough and
ugly, and not at all well reasoned, being the world's discretion; and, well I don't
I am delighted, nor can I be, according to a good speech, she is the
enchanted, the offended and the changed, changed and reversed, and in it they have
avenged on me my enemies, and for her I will live in perpetual tears,
until you see it in its pristine state. All this I have said so that nobody repairs
in what Sancho said about the sifting or the fact of Dulcinea; that, well to me
They moved it to me, it's no wonder they changed it to him. Dulcinea is
principal and well-born, and of the noble lineages that are in Toboso,
that they are many, old and very good, surely there is little room for
unparalleled part Dulcinea, for whom her place will be famous and named in
centuries to come, as Troy has been for Elena, and Spain for
Cava, although with a better title and fame. On the other hand, I want you to understand
your lordships that Sancho Panza is one of the funniest squires
that he never served as a knight errant; sometimes has such simplicities
acute, that thinking if it is simple or acute causes no small content; have
malice that condemns him as a scoundrel, and carelessness that confirms
fool; doubt everything and believe everything; when I think that he is going to fall off
silly, he comes out with a few discretions, which lift him to heaven. Finally me
I would not exchange him with another squire, even if they gave me a city in addition;
and thus, I am in doubt if it will be good to send the government of whom your
greatness has done him mercy; although I see in him a certain aptitude for this
to govern, that by tantalizing his understanding, he would get away with
any government, like the king with his alcabalas; and more, that already for
many experiences we know that it is not necessary neither much skill nor much
letters to be a governor, because there are a hundred out there that hardly know
read, and they rule like girifaltes; the touch is that they have good
intention and wish to get everything right; that they will never lack someone
advise and guide in what they have to do, as the governors
gentlemen and non-lawyers, who sentence with an advisor. I would advise you
nor take bribes, nor lose rights, and other things that I have left in the
stomach, which will come out in due time, for the benefit of Sancho and the benefit of the
island that I will rule.
At this point the Duke, the Duchess and Don Quixote arrived from their colloquy,
when they heard many voices and a great noise of people in the palace; already untimely
Sancho entered the room, all scared, with a scrim for a bib, and
behind him many waiters, or, to put it better, kitchen rogues and other people
small, and one came with a small pot of water, which in color and little
cleanliness showed to be scrubbing; the one in the trough followed and chased him, and
he tried with all solicitude to put it on and fit it under his beard,
and another rogue showed wanting to wash them.
-What is this, brothers? asked the Duchess. What is this? What do you want
to that good man? How and do you not consider that he is elected governor?
To which the rogue barber replied:
-This man does not want to be washed, as is customary, and how he washed it
Duke my lord and lord his master.
"Yes, I do," replied Sancho angrily, "but I would like it to be with
Cleaner towels, with lighter bleach and with less dirty hands; not
there is so much difference from me to my master, that they wash him with angels' water
and me with devil's bleach. The customs of the lands and palaces
princes are as good as they do not cause grief, but the
The custom of the lavatory that is used here is worse than that of disciplinarians. Me
I am clean of beards and have no need for such refreshments; and the
that I will get to wash or touch a hair of the head, I mean, of me
beard, speaking with due observance, I will give him such a handful that
the cuff set in the helmets; that these such ceremonies and suds
They look more like teasing than guest gauze.
The duchess was dying of laughter, seeing the anger and hearing the reasons
of Sancho, but Don Quixote was not very pleased to see him so badly dressed
with the marbled towel, and so surrounded by so many kitchen entertainers; and
thus, bowing deeply to the dukes, as if asking them
license to speak, in a calm voice he said to the scoundrel:
"Hello, gentlemen!" Your mercedes leave the young man, and come back
where they came from, or on the other hand if they fancy it, that my squire is
clean as much as another, and those knobs are for him narrow and painful
vases. Take my advice and leave him, because neither he nor I know of ailment
of teasing.
Sancho took the reason out of his mouth, and continued saying:
-No, but come to make fun of the show, that is how I will suffer it
now it is night! Bring here a comb, or whatever you want, and pad me
these beards, and if they take anything out of them that offends cleanliness, let me
shear at crosses.
At this time, without ceasing to laugh, said the Duchess:
-Sancho Panza is right in everything he has said, and he will have it in everything
whatever I say: he is clean, and, as he says, he has no need to
wash up; and if our use does not please you, your soul in your palm, how much
more, that you, ministers of cleanliness, have walked too much
of reluctant and careless, and I do not know if I say daring, to bring such
character and such beards, instead of fountains and ewers of pure gold and
of German towels, knickknacks and wooden sticks and knees of
sideboards. But, finally, you are bad and ill-born, and you cannot leave, as
mischievous that you are, to show the anger that you have with the squires of
the errant knights.
The busy ministers believed, and even the steward, who came with
them, that the duchess was truly speaking; and thus, they removed the striker from the
Sancho's chest, and everyone confused and almost flushed left and left him;
who, seeing himself out of that, in his opinion, extreme danger, went to
kneel before the duchess and said:
-From great ladies, great mercies are expected; is that yours
Merced today has dated me, it cannot be paid with less, if it is not with wishing
see myself armed as a knight errant, to occupy myself every day of my life in
serve such a high lady. I am Labrador, my name is Sancho Panza, I am married,
I have children and I serve as a squire: if with some of these things I can serve
your greatness, it will take less time for me to obey than your lordship in
send.
`` It seems well, Sancho, '' replied the Duchess, `` that you have learned to be
courteous in the school of the same courtesy; Well it seems, I mean, that
you have been raised at the breasts of Mr. Don Quixote, who must be the
cream of the restraints and the flower of the ceremonies, or cirimonias, as
you say. Well there is such a lord and such a servant: the one, from the north of the
errant cavalry; and the other, as a star of the fidelity squad.
Get up, Sancho friend, I will satisfy your courtesies with making
the duke my lord, as quickly as possible, fulfill the promised mercy
of the government.
With this the talk ceased, and Don Quixote went to rest his siesta, and the
Duchess asked Sancho if he didn't feel like sleeping much to come to
spend the afternoon with her and her maids in a very cool room. Sancho
He replied that, although it was true that it was his custom to sleep four or
five hours of summer naps, that, in serving his goodness, he
he would try with all his might not to sleep at all that day, and he would come
obedient to his command, and go. The duke gave new orders as
treat Don Quixote as a knight errant, without leaving a point of the
style as they say that the ancient gentlemen were treated.
Chapter XXXIII. Of the tasty talk that the duchess and her maids
they passed with Sancho Panza, worthy of being read and noted
Thus, the story tells that Sancho did not take that nap, but that,
To keep his word, he came to see the Duchess for lunch; which, with
the pleasure he had to hear him, made him sit next to him in a low chair,
although Sancho, purely well-bred, did not want to sit down; but the duchess
He said to sit as governor and speak as a squire, since by
Both things deserved the same seat as Cid Ruy Díaz Campeador.
Sancho shrugged his shoulders, obeyed, and sat down, and all the maidens and
mistresses of the duchess surrounded her, attentive, with great silence, to
listen to what he would say; but the duchess was the one who spoke first, saying:
-Now that we are alone, and that no one here hears us, I would like him to
Mr. Governor, I had certain doubts that I have, born of the
history that of the great Don Quixote is already in print; one of which you doubt
is that, well, good Sancho never saw Dulcinea, I mean, Mrs.
Dulcinea del Toboso, nor did she bring him the letter from Don Quixote, because
remained in the memory book in Sierra Morena, how he dared to pretend the
answer, and that of which he found her making wheat, being all mockery and
lie, and so much to the good opinion of the peerless Dulcinea, and all
that do not come well with the quality and fidelity of good squires.
To these reasons, without answering any, Sancho got up from his chair,
and, with quiet steps, the overwhelmed body and the finger placed on the lips,
He walked around the room raising the canopies; And then this done, I know
sat down again and said:
-Now, my lady, I have seen that nobody listens to us from the lapel, outside
of the bystanders, without fear or shock I will respond to what has been
asked, and everything that I will be asked; and the first thing I say is
that I consider my lord Don Quixote to be a madman, since some
sometimes says things that, in my opinion, and even of all those who
listen, they are so discreet and on such a good track, that the same
Satan couldn't say better; but, with all this, truly and
unscrupulous, it has been established to me that he is a fool. Well like me
I have this in my mind, I dare to make you believe that it does not have feet or
head, as was the response to the letter, and there will be six or
eight days, which is not yet in history; It is convenient to know: the charm of
my lady doña Dulcinea, who I have given you to understand that she is delighted,
being more true than for the hills of Úbeda.
The duchess begged him to tell her that incantation or mockery, and Sancho
He told everything about the same way that had happened, that they received no little pleasure
the listeners; and, continuing her talk, the Duchess said:
-From what good Sancho has told me, a scruple is jumping on me.
the soul and a certain whisper reaches my ears, which tells me: `` Well, don
Quixote de la Mancha is crazy, diminished and foolish, and Sancho Panza his
Squire knows him, and, with all that, he serves him and follows him and is attended at
vain promises of his, without a doubt he must be more crazy and foolish than
his master; And, this being so, as it is, it will be wrongly counted to you, madam
Duchess, if you give this Sancho Panza insula to govern, because the one who
He does not know how to govern himself, how will he know how to govern others? ''
"Good heavens, ma'am," said Sancho, "that scruple comes with a right birth;
but tell your grace to speak clearly, or as you wish, that I know
that says the truth: that if I were discreet, days ago there would have been
left to my master. But this was my luck, and this was my mischief; can not
more, I have to follow him: we are from the same place, I have eaten his bread, I love him
Well, he is grateful, tell me his chicks, and, above all, I am faithful; and so,
it is impossible that another event can separate us than that of the shovel and hoe.
And if your arrogance does not want the promised government to be given to me,
God did less to me, and it could be that not giving him would redound to my benefit
awareness; that, silly magician, you understand that saying `` for your evil
wings were born to the ant ''; and it could still be that she was more like
Sancho squire to heaven, not Sancho governor. So good bread they make here
as in France; and at night all cats are brown, and quite
unhappy is the person who at two in the afternoon has not had breakfast; and
there is no stomach that is a span greater than another, which can be filled,
as they say, of straw and hay; and the little birds of the field have
God for your provider and pantry; and more they heat four rods of cloth
Cuenca than four others on the border of Segovia; and leaving this world and
to get into the land, for as narrow a path goes the prince as the
laborer, and the body of the Pope occupies no more feet than that of the
sacristan, although one is taller than the other; that when entering the hole
we all adjust and shrink, or they make us adjust and shrink, badly
despite already good night. And around to say that if your honor does not
I want to take the island for a fool, I will know not to give myself anything for being discreet; and
I have heard that behind the cross is the devil, and that not all is gold
what glitters, and that from among the oxen, plows and ropes drew the
farmer Wamba to be king of Spain, and among the brocades, pastimes
and riches they took Rodrigo out to be eaten by snakes, if the
Trovas of ancient romances do not lie.
-And why don't they lie! -said at this time Dona Rodríguez the owner, who
was one of the listeners-: that there is a romance that says they put the
King Rodrigo, alive alive, in a grave full of toads, snakes and lizards, and
that in two days the king said from inside the tomb, with a voice
suffering and low:
They already eat me, they already eat me
for c there was more sin;
And, according to this, this man is very right in saying that he wants more to be more
farmer than king, if they have to eat vermin.
The duchess could not have laugh, hearing the simplicity of her mistress, nor
He ceased to be amazed at hearing the reasons and sayings of Sancho, to whom he said:
-Good Sancho already knows that what a gentleman once promises he tries
fulfill it, even if it costs him his life. The Duke, my lord and husband, though not
He is one of the erring, but that does not mean he ceases to be a knight, and thus, he will fulfill the
word of the promised island, despite the invidiousness and malice of the
world. Be Sancho in good spirits, that when you least think about it you will see
sitting in the chair of his insula and that of his state, and will wield his
government, that with another three-high brocade discards it. What i
commission is to watch how he governs his vassals, noting that all are
loyal and well born.
`` That of governing them well, '' answered Sancho, `` there is no need to entrust it to me,
because I am charitable to mine and I have compassion for the poor; and whom
cook and knead, do not steal a loaf from him; and for my cross that they do not have me
throw false dice; I'm an old dog, and I understand all your, your, and I know
wake up to their times, and I do not allow shrews to walk before the
eyes, because I know where my shoe squeezes me: say it because the good
They will have with me hand and hollow, and the wicked, neither foot nor entrance. AND
It seems to me that in this matter of governments, everything is beginning, and it could be
that fifteen days after being governor, he ate my hands after the office and
I knew more about him than about the work in the fields, in which I have grown up.
`` You are right, Sancho, '' said the Duchess, `` that no one is born taught,
and of the men the bishops are made, that not of the stones. But,
going back to the talk that we had little dealt with about the charm of the lady
Dulcinea, I have as certain and more than ascertained that that
imagination Sancho had of outwitting his lord and making him understand that the
a farmer was Dulcinea, and that if her master did not know her it must be because of
be enchanted, it was all the invention of one of the charmers who
Mr. Don Quixote they pursue; because really and truly I know good
part that the villain who jumped on the colt was and is Dulcinea
del Toboso, and that good Sancho, thinking that he is the deceiver, is the
cheated; and there is no more doubt in this truth than in the things that never
we saw; and Mr. Sancho Panza know that we also have charming people here
who love us well, and tell us what is going on in the world, pure and
simply, without entanglements or machines; and believe me Sancho that the villain
jumping was and is Dulcinea del Toboso, who is delighted like the mother
who gave birth to her; and when we least think about it, we have to see it on its own
figure, and then Sancho will emerge from the deception in which he lives.
"It may well be all that," said Sancho Panza; and now I want to believe what
my master tells of what he saw in the cave of Montesinos, where he says he saw
Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso in the same dress and habit that I said she
I had seen when I enchanted her for my taste alone; and everything must have been to
the other way around, as your mercy, my lady, he says, because of my base ingenuity I do not know
can and should not presume that he fabricated such a sharp deception in an instant, nor
I believe that my master is so crazy that with such skinny and meager persuasion as the
I thought it was such an out-of-the-box thing. But ma'am not for this
It will be good if your goodness considers me malicious, because it is not obliged
a joint like me to drill the thoughts and malice of the lousy
charming: I pretended that to escape the quarrels of my lord don
Quixote, and not with the intention of offending him; And if it came out the other way around, God
he is in heaven, who judges hearts.
"That is the truth," said the Duchess; but tell me now, Sancho, what is this
What does he say about the Montesinos cave, that he would like to know.
Then Sancho Panza told him point by point what is said about
such an adventure. Hearing which the Duchess said:
-From this event it can be inferred that, since the great Don Quixote says that he saw
there the same farmer that Sancho saw at the exit of Toboso, without a doubt
is Dulcinea, and that charming people are around here very smart and
too curious.
`` That's what I say, '' said Sancho Panza, `` that if my lady Dulcinea del Toboso is
enchanted, its damage; that I do not have to drink, I, with my enemies
master, they must be many and bad. It is true that the one I saw was a
A farmer, and I had her for a farmer, and for such a farmer I judged her; what if
that was Dulcinea, she must not be on my account, nor must she run for me, or
about it, brunette. No, but go to every triquet with me to tell me and
tell yourself, "Sancho said it, Sancho did it, Sancho returned and Sancho returned",
as if Sancho were someone whoever, and was not the same Sancho Panza,
the one who is already in books in that world ahead, as Samson told me
Carrasco, who, at least, has a high school degree from Salamanca, and the
Such cannot lie if it is not when they feel like it or when it comes to
story; so, there is no reason for anyone to take me, and well what do I have
good reputation, and, as I heard my lord say, that a good name is better than
the many riches, fit that government to me and you will see wonders; who
he has been a good squire, he will be a good governor.
"All that good Sancho has said here," said the Duchess, "are sentences
catonian, or, at least, taken from the very entrails of the same
Micael Verino, florentibus occidit annis. Anyway, anyway, talking to her
Thus, underneath a bad coat there is usually a good drinker.
"In truth, ma'am," replied Sancho, "in my life I have drunk with malice;
with thirst it could well be, because I am not hypocritical: I drink when
I feel like it, and when I don't have it and when they give it to me, for not looking or
picky or spoiled; than to a toast from a friend, what heart has to
be so marble that it does not make the reason? But, although I wear them, I do not
dirty; how much more, that the squires of the knights errant, almost of
Ordinary people drink water, because they always walk through forests, jungles and meadows,
mountains and crags, without finding a mercy of wine, if they give for it a
eye.
"I think so," replied the Duchess. And for now, Sancho go to
rest, that later we will speak more and we will give order as soon as it goes
to fit in, as he says, that government.
Again Sancho kissed the duchess's hands, and begged her to do
thanks to the fact that he had a good account with his white, because it was the fire of
his eyes.
-What redhead is this? asked the Duchess.
`` My ass, '' answered Sancho, `` because by not naming him by this name, I usually
call the rucio; I already begged this lady owner, when I entered this
castle, had an account on him, and was haunted in a way as if he had
said that it was ugly or old, should be more typical and natural of the owners
think judgments that authorize the rooms. Oh my goodness, and how bad
a gentleman from my place was with these ladies!
`` It would be some villain, '' said Dona Rodríguez, the owner, `` if he were
noble and well-born, he would put them on the horn of the moon.
-Agora bien -said the duchess-, there is no more: doña Rodríguez street and
Mr. Panza calm down, and let me be in charge of the gift of the rucio; that,
for being Sancho's jewel, I will put it on the apple of my eyes.
-In the stable it is enough that he is -answered Sancho-, that about the girls
From the eyes of your greatness, neither he nor I are worthy of being only one
moment, and that is how I would consent to stabbing myself; that, although it says
my lord that in the courtesies before has to be lost by letter of more than of
less, in the jumentiles and thus girls have to go with the compass in hand and
with measured term.
`` Take him, '' said the Duchess, `` Sancho to the government, and there he can give him as
I want, and even retire from work.
"Do not think your grace, Senora Duchessa, that you have said much," said Sancho;
that I have seen more than two donkeys go to governments, and that I took the
mine would not be a new thing.
Sancho's reasons renewed laughter and contentment in the Duchess; and,
sending him to rest, she went to give an account to the duke of what she had
past, and between the two they gave a trace and order to make a mockery of Don
Quixote that was famous and suited the chivalric style, in the
which they made many, so own and discreet, which are the best
adventures that are contained in this great story.
Chapter XXXIV. What account of the news that was had of how
disenchant the unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso, which is one of the most
famous from this book
Great was the pleasure the Duke and Duchess took in conversation
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza; and, confirming the intention
they had to make some taunts that brought glimpses and appearances
of adventures, they took motive of the one that Don Quixote had already told them about
Montesinos cave, to make it one that was famous (but what
The most the duchess admired was that Sancho's simplicity was so great that
would have come to believe to be infallible truth that Dulcinea del Toboso
was delighted, he himself having been the charmer and the liar of
that business); and thus, having ordered his servants of all that
they had to do, six days later they took him hunting hunting, with
as much apparatus of huntsmen and hunters as a crowned king could carry.
They gave Don Quixote a mountain dress and Sancho a green one,
very fine cloth; but Don Quixote did not want to put it, saying that another day
he had to return to the hard exercise of arms and that he could not carry
I get wardrobes or pastries. Sancho did take the one they gave him, with
intention to sell you the first time I could.
When, then, the awaited day arrived, Don Quixote armed himself, Sancho dressed, and,
on top of his gray, who did not want to leave him even though they gave him a horse,
he entered among the troop of huntsmen. The duchess came out bizarrely
seasoned, and Don Quixote, purely courteous and restrained, took the reins of his
pafrén, although the duke did not want to indulge it, and, finally, they came to
a forest between two very high mountains was, where, taken the
stalls, paranzas and sidewalks, and the people distributed by different stalls,
The hunt began with a great roar, shouting and shouting, so that
each other could not be heard, both by the barking of the dogs and by the
They are from the speakers.
The duchess alighted, and, with a sharp spear in her hands, stood on a
post where she knew some wild boars used to come. Got off
likewise the Duke and Don Quixote, and they stood by his sides; Sancho got
behind everyone, without alighting from the white, who would not dare to abandon, because
no mischief should happen to him. And, they had barely set foot and put in
wing with many other servants of his, when, harassed by the dogs and followed
of the hunters, they saw that an inordinate wild boar was coming towards them,
gnashing teeth and fangs and foaming at the mouth; and in
Seeing him, clutching his shield and laying hand on his sword, he stepped forward to
receive Don Quixote. The duke did the same with his spear; but to all
the Duchess would come forward, if the Duke did not interfere. Only Sancho, in
Seeing the brave animal, he forsaken the red deer and ran as fast as he could,
and, trying to climb on a tall oak, it was not possible; before, being
already in the middle of it, clinging to a branch, struggling to climb to the top, it was so
short of luck and so unhappy that the branch broke off, and, coming to the
ground, remained in the air, grasped by a hook of the oak, without being able to
get to the ground. And, looking like this, and that the green tunic was ripping, and
seeming to him that if that fierce animal got there it could reach him,
began to shout so much and call for help so eagerly that everyone
those who heard him and did not see him believed that he was between the teeth of
some beast.
Finally, the tusked boar was pierced by the blades of
many spears that were put before him; and, turning his head don
Quixote, at the cries of Sancho, who had already known him through them, violated
slope of the oak and head down, and the red next to him, who does not
forsaken in his calamity; and Cide Hamete says that he rarely saw Sancho
Belly without seeing the rodent, nor the rooster without seeing Sancho: such was friendship and
good faith that between the two they kept.
Don Quixote arrived and picked up Sancho; which, seeing himself free and in the
On the ground, he looked at the torn part of the forest robe, and it weighed on his soul; what did you think
that she had a mayorazgo in her dress. In this, they pierced the wild boar
powerful on a hemlock, and, covering it with rosemary bushes and branches
of myrtle, they took him, as a sign of victorious spoils, to some large
tents that were set up in the middle of the forest, where
They found the tables in order and the food seasoned, so sumptuous and large,
that it was good to see in her the greatness and magnificence of those who
gave. Sancho, showing the duchess of her torn dress the sores, said:
-If this hunt were for hares or birds, my coat would surely be
see yourself in this stretch. I do not know what taste is received from waiting for an animal
that, if it hits you with a tusk, it can take your life; I remember
have heard an ancient romance sing that says:
Of bears be eaten,
as Favila the named.
`` That was a Gothic king, '' said Don Quixote, `` who, while hunting for game,
ate a bear.
`` That is what I say, '' answered Sancho, `` that I would not want them to
princes and kings would put themselves in such peril, at the barter of a
taste that seems that it should not be, because it consists of killing an animal
that he has not committed any crime.
`` Before you are mistaken, Sancho, '' replied the duke, `` because the exercise of
bush hunting is the most convenient and necessary for kings and princes
than any other. Hunting is an image of war: there is in it
stratagems, cunning, tricks to defeat your safe the enemy;
extremely great cold and intolerable heat are found in it; undermine the
leisure and sleep, corroborate the forces, agitate the limbs of the
uses it, and, in resolution, it is an exercise that can be done without prejudice to
no one and with the pleasure of many; and the best thing he has is that he is not for
all, as is that of the other hunting genres, except that of the
poultry, which is also only for kings and great lords. So oh
Sancho !, change your mind, and, when you are governor, engage in hunting and
You will see how one percent of bread is worth to you.
`` Not that, '' answered Sancho, `` the good governor, his leg broken and
home. It would be good if the businessmen came looking for him tired and he
he was in the mountains enjoying himself! So congratulations would the government walk! Mine
faith, sir, hunting and pastimes are to be for the lazy who
for governors. What I think to entertain myself is to play
triumph envied Easter, and bowling on Sundays and holidays; that
Those fighters or saucepans do not say with my condition nor do they with my conscience.
-Plead to God, Sancho, so be it, because from said to fact there is great
stretch.
`` Whatever there is, '' Sancho replied, `` they don't hurt the good payer.
garments, and the one who God helps is better than the one who gets up early, and guts
they have feet, not feet to the guts; I mean if God helps me, and I
I do what I must with good intention, no doubt that I will rule better than a
gerfalcon. No, but put your finger in my mouth and see if I press or not!
"Damn you to God and to all his saints, cursed Sancho," said Don
Quixote-, and when will the day be, as I have said many times, where I
I see you speak without sayings a common and concerted reason! Your
greatness leave this fool, my lords, who will grind your souls, no
only put between two, but between two thousand sayings, brought so well and
as in time as God gives him health, or me if he wanted them
listen.
`` The sayings of Sancho Panza, '' said the Duchess, `` since they are more than
of the Greek Commander, not for that reason they are in less than estimating, for the brevity
of the sentences. I know how to say that they give me more pleasure than others, although
be better brought and more seasoned accommodated.
With these and other entertaining reasonings, they left the store to the
forest, and in requiring some paranzas, and soon, the day passed and they
Night came to them, and not so clear nor so skewed as the seasoning of time
I asked, that it was in the middle of the summer; but a certain clear-dark what trujo
with it it greatly helped the intention of the dukes; and, just as it began to
dusk, a little after twilight, at wrong time it seemed that everything
the forest on all four sides was burning, and then they could be heard around here and
over there, and here and there, infinite cornets and other instruments
of war, as of many cavalry troops that passed through the forest. The
firelight, the sound of warlike instruments, almost blinded and thundered
the eyes and ears of the bystanders, and even of all who in the
forest they were. Then infinite lelilíes were heard, in the use of Moors when
They enter battles, trumpets and bugles sounded, drums rumbled,
freaks rang out, almost all at the same time, so continuous and so hurried, that
there was no point in not being left without him to the confusing of so many
instruments. The Duke was astonished, the Duchess was suspended, Mr.
Quixote, you Sancho Panza touched , and, finally, even even the knowing ones
of the cause they were scared. Silence seized them with fear, and a
postillion who in demon costume passed them, playing in the voice of
cornet a hollow and inordinate horn, that a hoarse and frightful are
fired.
-Hello, mail brother! said the duke, "who are you, where are you going, and what
Is it the people of war who seem to be going through this forest?
To which the email responded with a horrid and carefree voice:
-I'm the devil; I'm going to look for Don Quixote de la Mancha; the people who
here they come are six troops of enchanters, who on a cart
triumphantly they bring the unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso. Enchanted comes with the
gallant French Montesinos, to order Don Quixote on how to be
disenchanted the such lady.
-If you were a devil, as you say and as your figure shows,
you would have met such a gentleman Don Quixote de la Mancha, since he
you have in front of you.
`` In God and in my conscience, '' replied the Devil, `` who was not looking at it,
because I bring in so many funny things the thoughts, that of the
The main thing I was coming to I forgot.
"Undoubtedly," said Sancho, "this demon must be a good and good man.
Christian, because, if not, I would not swear in God and in my conscience. Now
I have for me that even in hell there must be good people.
Then the Devil, without alighting, looking at Don Quixote, said:
-To you, the Knight of the Lions (may I see you between their claws),
The unfortunate but brave knight Montesinos sends me, ordering me to
on his part he tells you to wait for him in the same place that he will bump into you, because
who brings with him what they call Dulcinea del Toboso, with an order to give you the
that it is necessary to disenchant it. And, for not being for more my coming, has not
to be more my stay: demons like me stay with you, and angels
good to these gentlemen.
And, in saying this, he blew the wild horn, and turned his back and
was, without waiting for a response from anyone.
The admiration in everyone was renewed, especially in Sancho and Don Quixote: in
Sancho, to see that, despite the truth, they wanted him to be
enchanted Dulcinea; in Don Quixote, for not being able to ascertain whether it was true or
not what had happened to him in the Montesinos cave. And, being elevated in
these thoughts, the duke said:
"Does your grace intend to wait, Senor Don Quixote?"
-Well no? he replied. Here I will wait fearless and strong, if I came
to ram all hell.
-Well, if I see another devil and hear another horn like the past, then I will wait
I eat here in Flanders, 'said Sancho.
In this, the night was closed more, and many lights began to pass by
the forest, just as the dry exhalations of
the earth, which seem to our eyes running stars. Also heard
a dreadful noise, in the manner of that caused by the massive wheels that
ox carts are usually brought in, from whose harsh and continuous screeching are
He says that wolves and bears flee, if there are any where they pass. Added to
all this storm another that increased them all, which was that it seemed
truly that the four parts of the forest were giving themselves to a
at the same time four encounters or battles, because there sounded the hard
roar of dreadful artillery, infinite
shotguns, near the voices of the combatants almost sounded, far away
the Agarean Lilies reiterated.
Finally, the cornets, the horns, the horns, the bugles, the
trumpets, drums, artillery, arquebuses, and, above all, the
fearful noise of the cars, they all formed together a sound so confused and
so horrendous that it was necessary for Don Quixote to make use of all his
heart to suffer him; but Sancho's came ashore, and found him
passed out on the skirts of the Duchess, who received him in them, already
great haste he ordered water to be poured on his face. It was done so, and he came back
in their agreement, just as a chariot with its squeaky wheels came to
that post.
Four lazy oxen were being thrown at him, all covered with black facings; on
Each horn had a large wax ax tied and lit, and on top of the
a car had a high seat made, on which a venerable
old man, with a beard whiter than the snow itself, and so long that it
it passed from the waist; His garment was a long black bocací garment, which,
to come the car full of infinite lights, you could well see and
discern everything that came in him. Guiding him were two ugly demons dressed in the
same mouth, with such ugly faces that Sancho, having seen them once,
he closed his eyes for not seeing another. Arriving, then, the car to match the
put, the venerable old man arose from his high seat, and, standing,
giving a great voice, he said:
-I am the wise Lirgandeo.
And the car passed ahead, without speaking another word. After this another car passed
in the same way, with another enthroned old man; which, making the
car stopped, with a voice no less serious than the other, said:
-I am the wise Alcheph, the great friend of Urganda the Unknown.
And he passed on.
Then, on the same continent, another car arrived; but the one who was sitting
on the throne he was not old like the others, but a robust and bad man
catadura, who, on arriving, standing up, like the others, said with
hoarser and more devilish voice:
-I am Arcalaus the charming, mortal enemy of Amadís de Gaula and all
their relatives.
And he passed on. Little deviated from there they stopped these three chariots, and
the annoying noise of its wheels ceased, and then there was another, not noise, but
a sound of a soft and concerted music formed, with which Sancho rejoiced,
and it was a good sign; and so, he said to the Duchess, of whom a point or a
step was withdrawing:
-Madam, where there is music there can be no bad thing.
"Nor where there are lights and clarity," replied the Duchess.
To which Sancho replied:
-Light gives the fire and clarity the bonfires, as we see it in which we
surround us, and it could well be that they hug us, but music is always
a sign of rejoicing and festivities.
"He will tell," said Don Quixote, who was listening to everything.
And he said well, as shown in the next chapter.
Chapter XXXV. Where the news that Don Quixote had of the
Dulcinea's disenchantment, with other admirable events
To the beat of the pleasant music, they saw a carriage coming towards them.
those who call triumphant pulled by six brown mules, cloaked,
However, of white canvas, and on each one came a disciplinarian of light,
also dressed in white, with a large wax ax lit on the
hand. It was the car twice, and even three times, bigger than the last ones, and the
sides, and above it, occupied twelve other disciplining white as snow,
all with their lighted axes, a sight that he admired and terrified together;
and on a raised throne sat a nymph, dressed in a thousand veils of
silver cloth, shining through all of them infinite silver leaves of
gold, which made her, if not rich, at least ornately dressed. Brought the
face covered with a transparent and delicate shimmer, so that, without
his healds prevented it, between them a very beautiful face of
maiden, and the many lights gave place to distinguish the beauty and the
years, which, apparently, did not reach twenty or less than seventeen.
Next to her came a figure dressed in a clothing called
rozagantes, up to the feet, the head covered with a black veil; but
point that the car came to be face to face with the dukes and don
Quixote, the music of the shawms ceased, and then that of the harps and lutes
that they sounded in the car; and, standing up the figure of the clothes, the
She turned on both sides, and, removing the veil from her face, discovered
patently being the very figure of death, stark and ugly, that don
Quixote was saddened and Sancho was afraid, and the dukes made some
fearful feeling. Raised and standing this living death, with a voice something
Asleep and with her tongue not very awake, she began to say in this way:
-I am Merlin, the one who stories
They say that I had the devil for my father
(authorized lie of the times),
prince of the magic and monarch
and archive of Zoroastrian science,
emulus to the ages and the centuries
that exploits pretend to overlap
of the errant brave knights
whom I had and have great affection.
And, since it is one of the charming ones,
of the magicians or magicians I continue
the condition lasts, harsh and strong,
mine is tender, soft and loving,
and friend of doing good to all people.
In the gloomy caverns of Dite,
where was my soul entertained
in forming certain rhombuses and characters,
came the sorrowful voice of the beautiful
and unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso.
I knew his enchantment and his misfortune,
and her transformation into a gentle lady
in rustic village; sympathize with me,
and, locking my spirit in the hole
this dreadful and fierce notomy,
after having scrambled a hundred thousand books
my devilish and clumsy science stands out,
I come to give the appropriate remedy
to size pain, to bad size.
Oh you, glory and honor of all who wear
the robes of steel and diamond,
light and lantern, path, north and guide
of those who, leaving the clumsy dream
and the idle feathers, they settle
to use intolerable exercise
of the bloody and heavy weapons!
I say to you oh man, how should it be
for ever praised !, to you, brave
together and discreet Don Quixote,
of La Mancha splendor, of Spain star,
that to regain its prime status
the unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso,
it is necessary that Sancho, your squire,
three thousand lashes and three hundred
in both her brave buttocks,
in the open air, and so
that sting, embitter and annoy you.
And in this all how many are resolved
of his misfortune have been the authors,
this is my coming, my lords.
-I vote so! Sancho said at this time. I do not say three thousand lashes, but
so I'll give myself three like three stabs. Fuck the devil by way of
disenchant! I don't know what my poses have to do with charms! Pair
God, if Mr. Merlin has found no other way to disenchant the
Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, delighted to be able to go to the grave!
`` Take you, '' said Don Quixote, `` Don Quixote, fed up with garlic, and tie you up.
I have a tree, naked as your mother gave birth to you; and I don't say three thousand and
three hundred, but six thousand and six hundred lashes I will give you, so well hit
Don't let them fall at three thousand and three hundred jerks. And do not reply to me
word, that I will tear your soul.
Hearing which Merlin said:
-It must not be like that, because the lashes that good Sancho has to receive have
to be by his will, and not by force, and in the time that he wants;
that there is no specified term; but let him if he wants
redeem your vexation by half of this vapulation, you can let it
they are given by someone else's hand, even if it is somewhat heavy.
`` Neither foreign, nor own, nor heavy, nor out of spite, '' replied Sancho, `` I don't
has to touch a hand. Did I, by any chance, give birth to Mrs. Dulcinea from the
Toboso, so that my posas pay what their eyes sinned? The lord my master
Yes, that is part of her, because at every step she calls my life, my soul, sustenance
and close to her, you can and should spank for her and do all the
steps necessary for their disenchantment; but whip me ...?
Abernuncio!
Scarcely had Sancho finished saying this when, standing up the silver
nymph who came along with the spirit of Merlin, removing the subtle veil of the
face, he discovered such that it seemed to everyone more than too much
handsome, and, with a manly casualness and a not very adamant voice, speaking
right with Sancho Panza, he said:
-O unfortunate squire, pitcher's soul, cork oak's heart,
winking and grinning entrails! If they sent you, you would skin your skin thief,
to throw yourself from a high tower to the ground; if they asked you, enemy of
human race, that you eat a dozen toads, two lizards and three
of snakes; if they persuaded you to kill your wife and children with
some truculent and sharp cutlass, it would not be a wonder that you showed yourself
picky and elusive; but pay attention to three thousand and three hundred lashes, that
there is no child of doctrine, however vile, who does not take them every month,
admires, adarva, frightens all the pious entrails of those who
listen, and even those of all those who come to know with him
time discourse. Put, oh wretched and hardened animal, put, I say,
those your scary machuelo eyes on the girls of mine, compared
shining stars, and you will see them cry thread by thread and skein by skein,
making furrows, runs and trails through the beautiful fields of my cheeks.
Move, sly and malicious monster, that my flowery age,
that it is still still in the ten and ... of the years, because I have ten and
nine and not twenty, it is consumed and withered under the bark of
a rustic farmer; And if I don't seem like it now, it is a particular mercy that
Mr. Merlin has made me, who is present, just because it touches you
my beauty; that the tears of an afflicted beauty return to cotton
the cliffs, and the tigers in sheep. Date, date in those baits, bestion
indomitable, and he takes that verve out of Harón, that just eating and eating
incline, and release the smoothness of my flesh, the meekness of my
condition and beauty of my face; and if for me you do not want to soften or
reduce yourself to some reasonable term, do it for that poor gentleman who
side you have; for your master, I say, whose soul I am seeing, who has it
pierced in the throat, not ten fingers of the lips, which does not expect but
your stiff or soft response, or to come out through the mouth, or to turn to the
stomach.
Hearing this, Don Quixote felt his throat and said, turning to the Duke:
-By God, sir, that Dulcinea has told the truth, that here I have the soul
down the throat like a crossbow nut.
"What do you say to this, Sancho?" asked the Duchess.
"I mean, ma'am," answered Sancho, "what I have said: that of the whipping,
abernuncio.
"You must say Abrenuncio, Sancho, and not as you say," said the duke.
-Leave me your greatness -answered Sancho-, I am not now to look
in sotilezas or in letters more to less; because these have disturbed me so much
spankings that they have to give me, or I have to give myself, I don't know what I'm saying to myself, or
what I do to myself. But I would like to know about my lady, my lady, Dona Dulcina
del Toboso, where he learned his way of praying: he comes to ask me to
spank my flesh, and call me the soul of a pitcher and an indomitable beast,
with a tiramira of bad names, that the devil suffers them. By chance
Are my flesh made of bronze, or is something going to be disappointing for me or not? That
basket of linen, shirts, dressing tables and booties, anque
I do not spend them, he brings before him to soften me, but a reproach and another,
knowing that saying that they say around there, that a donkey loaded with gold rises
light for a mountain, and that gifts break rocks, and God praying and
With the deck giving, and what is better one "take" than two "I will give you"? Well the
lord my master, who was to bring my hand over the hill and flatter me for
that I made myself of wool and carded cotton, he says that if he catches me
he will tie naked to a tree and he will double the stop of the lashes; and they had
to consider these hurt gentlemen who not only ask to be spanked
a squire, but a governor; like someone who says: "drink with sour cherries".
Learn, learn a lot from enhorala to know how to pray, and to know how to ask, now
have upbringing, which are not all times, nor are men
always in a good mood. I'm now bursting with grief to see my dress
broken green, and they come to ask me to whip me of my will, while she
as alien to it as to become a chief.
"Well, really, friend Sancho," said the duke, "if you don't soften any more
than a ripe fig, which the government will not wield. It would be good
that I sent to my insulans a cruel governor, with a heart
flint, which does not bow to the tears of the afflicted maidens,
nor to the pleas of discreet, imperious and ancient enchanters and wise men!
In resolution, Sancho, either you are to be flogged, or you are to be flogged, or
you are not to be a governor.
"Sir," replied Sancho, "wouldn't I have two days left to think
what is best for me?
"No, not at all," said Merlin; here, in this moment and in this
Instead, what is to be this business must be established, or Dulcinea
will return to the cave of Montesinos and its pristine state of farm, or already,
in the being she is, she will be taken to the Elysian Fields, where she will be
waiting for the number of the vápulo to be fulfilled.
`` Come on, good Sancho, '' said the Duchess, `` good spirits and good correspondence to the
bread that you have eaten from Señor Don Quixote, whom we must all serve and
please, for his good condition and for his high horsemanship. Say yes
son, this lashing, and go the devil for devil and fear for
mean; that a good heart breaks bad luck, as you well know.
To these reasons, Sancho responded with these absurdities, that, speaking with
Merlin asked him:
`` Give me your mercy, Mr. Merlin: when the mail devil arrived here and
gave my master a message from Senor Montesinos, sending him on his behalf that
wait here, because he had come to give order that Mrs. Doña Dulcinea del
Toboso was disenchanted, and until now we have not seen Montesinos, nor his
resemblances.
To which Merlin replied:
-The Devil, friend Sancho, is an ignorant and a great scoundrel: I
I sent in search of your master, but not with a message from Montesinos, but mine,
because Montesinos is in his cave understanding, or, to put it better,
waiting for his disappointment, that his tail still needs to be flayed. If he owes you
something, or do you have something to negotiate with him, I will bring it to you and put
where you want the most. And, for now, just say yes to this
discipline, and believe me that it will be of much benefit to you, both for the soul and
for the body: for the soul, for the charity with which you will do it; for him
body, because I know that you are of a sanguine complexion, and he will not be able to make you
It hurts to draw some of your blood.
-There are many doctors in the world: even the charming ones are doctors
Sancho replied; but, well, everyone tells me, even though I don't see it,
I say that I am happy to give myself the three thousand and three hundred lashes, with
condition that I have to give them every and when I want, without knowing
put a rate on the days or the time; and I will try to get out of debt
as quickly as possible, because the world enjoys the beauty of the
Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, because, it seems, the opposite of what I
I thought, it is indeed beautiful. It must also be a condition that I do not
be forced to draw blood with discipline, and what if some spanking
They were of mosqueo, they have to be taken into account. Iten, what if I err in
the number, Mr. Merlin, because he knows everything, has to be careful
count them and let me know those that are missing or those that are left over.
`` There will be no need to notify any leftovers, '' Merlin replied, `` because, arriving at the
the full number, then Mrs. Dulcinea will be suddenly disenchanted, and
will come to look for, as grateful, the good Sancho, and to give him thanks, and even
awards, for the good deed. So there is no need to scruple
leftovers or faults, nor does heaven allow me to fool anyone, even if
be in a hair of the head.
"Come, then, to the hand of God!" Sancho said. I consent to my bad
fortune; I say that I accept the penance with the indicated conditions.
Sancho scarcely said these last words, when the music began to play again.
of the shawms and infinite arquebuses were fired again, and don
Quixote hung around Sancho's neck, giving him a thousand kisses on the forehead and on
cheeks. The duchess and the duke and all bystanders gave
signs of having received great satisfaction, and the car began to
walk; and, as he passed, the beautiful Dulcinea bowed her head to the dukes and
made a great bow to Sancho.
And already, in this, the dawn was coming, happy and smiling: the
little flowers of the fields rose and rose, and the liquid
stream crystals, murmuring through white and brown pebbles,
they were going to pay tribute to the rivers that awaited them. The joyful earth, the sky
of course, the clean air, the serene light, each one by himself and all together, gave
You manifest signs that the day, that at dawn, was treading on the skirts,
it had to be calm and clear. And, satisfied the dukes of the hunt and of
having achieved their intention so discreetly and happily, they turned to their
castle, with the intention of supporting their mockery, which for them
there were you will see that they were more pleased.
Chapter XXXVI. Where the strange and never imagined adventure of the
Sorrowful owner, alias of Countess Trifaldi, with a letter that Sancho
Panza wrote to his wife Teresa Panza
The duke had a butler with a very burlesque and carefree wit, who
made the figure of Merlin and arranged all the apparatus of the past adventure,
he composed the verses and had a page do Dulcinea. Finally, with
intervention of his masters, he ordered another of the most funny and strange
artifice that can be imagined.
The duchess asked Sancho another day if he had begun the task of the
penance to be done for Dulcinea's disenchantment. Said yes,
and that that night he had given himself five lashes. The duchess asked him
with what he had given them. He answered that with his hand.
"That," replied the Duchess, "is more spanking than spanking." I have
for me that the wise Merlin will not be happy with so much softness; need
It will be that good Sancho does some discipline of thistles, or of those of
cannelloni, let them be felt; because the letter with blood enters, and I do not know
It has to give so cheap the freedom of such a great lady as Dulcinea is
for so little price; and Sancho warns that the works of charity that are
they do lukewarm and lazily have no merit or are worth anything.
To which Sancho replied:
-Your lordship give me some discipline or convenient branch, which I will give myself
with him as it does not hurt too much, because I let you know at your mercy that,
although I am rustic, my meats have more cotton than esparto, and no
It will be good for me to describe myself for the benefit of others.
`` Be in good time, '' replied the Duchess, `` I will give you a discipline tomorrow.
that it comes to you very just and is accommodated with the tenderness of your flesh,
as if they were her own sisters.
To which Sancho said:
-Know your highness, my lady of my soul, that I have written a
letter to my wife Teresa Panza, giving an account of everything that has happened to me
after I turned away from her; here I have it in my bosom, it does not lack more
to put the overwrite; I would like your discretion to read it,
because it seems to me that it goes according to the governor, I mean, the way
governors must write.
-And who noticed it? asked the Duchess.
-Who was to notice it but me, my sinner? Sancho answered.
-And did you write it? said the Duchess.
"I don't think so," answered Sancho, "because I can't read or write, since
that I know how to sign.
"Let us see it," said the Duchess, "that surely you will show in it the
quality and sufficiency of your ingenuity.
Sancho took an open letter from his bosom, and, taking it the Duchess, saw that
it said in this way:
Letter from Sancho Panza to Teresa Panza, his wife
If they gave me good spankings, well gentleman I would go; yes good government me
I have, good spanking is hard for me. You will not understand this, my Teresa, for
now; you'll know again. You must know, Teresa, that I have determined that
you drive, which is what makes the case, because all other walking is walking
on all fours. You are the woman of a governor, see if no one will gnaw at the stilts!
There I am sending you a green hunter's dress, which my lady the duchess gave me;
arrange it so that it serves as a skirt and bodies for our daughter. Don Quixote,
my master, as I have heard on this earth, is a sane madman and a
funny fool, and I'm not lagging behind. We have been to the cave of
Montesinos, and the wise Merlin has taken hold of me to the disenchantment of
Dulcinea del Toboso, who is called Aldonza Lorenzo over there: with three thousand and
three hundred lashes, minus five, that I have to give myself, she will be disenchanted as
the mother who gave birth to her. You will not say anything to anyone, because put yours in
council, and some will say that it is white and others that it is black. From here to few
days I will go to the government, where I go with a great desire to do
money, because I have been told that all the new governors go with this
same desire; I'll take his pulse, and let you know if you have to come and be with me
or not. The red is good, and much is entrusted to you; and I'm not going to leave him,
even if they took me to be a Grand Turk. The duchess my lady kisses you a thousand times
hands; return the return with two thousand, that there is nothing that less
It costs or is not worth cheaper, according to my master, than the good
restraints. God has not been served to store another suitcase with others
one hundred escudos, like the one in yore, but don't be ashamed, my Teresa,
Except there is the one that rings, and everything will come out in the government's laundry; but
It has given me great sadness that they tell me that if I try it once, that I have
eat hands behind him; and if it were, it would not cost me very cheap, although
the spoiled and maimed already have their calonjía in the alms they ask for;
So, one way or another, you have to be rich, of good fortune. God
give it to you, as I can, and keep me to serve you. From this castle, to
July 20, 1614.
Your husband the governor,
Sancho Panza.
As the Duchess finished reading the letter, she said to Sancho:
-In two things the good governor is a little misguided: the one, in saying
or to imply that this government has been given by the whipping that has been
of giving, knowing he cannot deny it, that when the duke, my lord,
it was promised to him, it was not dreamed of having scourges in the world; the other is that I know
shows in it very greedy, and I would not want oregano to be, because the
greed breaks the sack, and the greedy governor does justice
ungoverned.
"I am not saying it therefore, ma'am," answered Sancho; and if at your mercy
It seems that such a letter is not going as it should go, there is nothing but ripping it up and doing
a new one, and it could be that it would be worse if they leave it to my calf.
`` No, no, '' replied the Duchess, `` this is good, and I want the Duke to see it.
see.
With this they went to a garden, where they were to eat that day. Showed the
Duchess Sancho's letter to the Duke, of which he received great satisfaction.
They ate, and after the tablecloths had been lifted, and after
entertained a good space with the tasty conversation of Sancho, to
untimely was heard the very sad sound of a freak and that of a hoarse and
cold drum. They all showed fussing with the confused, martial and
sad harmony, especially Don Quixote, who did not fit in his seat of
cigar rowdy; of Sancho should not be said but that fear led him to his
customary refuge, which was the side or skirts of the duchess, because real and
truly the sound that was heard was very sad and malencholic.
And, being all suspended like that, they saw two
men dressed in mourning, so long and stretched out that he dragged them through the
ground; They were playing two large drums, also covered with
black. At his side came the freak, black and pizmiento like the others. I kept
at three a character with a gigantic body, loving, not that dressed, with
a very black wolf, whose skirt was also wild when she was big. By
Above the she-wolf she girded her and crossed a wide tahelí, also black, of
who hung an inordinate cutlass of garrisons and black scabbard. Came
covered his face with a transparent black veil, for whom he appeared
a very long beard, white as snow. He moved his step to the sound of
drums with a lot of gravity and rest. In short, his greatness, his swagger, his
blackness and its accompaniment could and could suspend all those who
without knowing him they looked at him.
He arrived, then, with space and prosopopoeia referred to kneeling
before the duke, who was standing, with the others who were there, he attended; but
the duke in no way allowed him to speak until he got up.
The prodigious scarecrow did so, and, standing up, raised the mask of the
face and revealed the most hideous, the longest, the whitest and the most
bushy beard that hitherto human eyes had seen, and then
dislodged and tore from his broad and enlarged chest a deep and resonant voice, and,
laying eyes on the duke, he said:
- Most high and powerful sir, they call me Trifaldin the one with the White Beard;
I am a squire of Countess Trifaldi, by another name called the Dueña
Sorrowful, from which I bring to your greatness an embassy, ​​and it is
May your magnificence be served by giving it the faculty and license to
come in to tell him his concern, which is one of the newest and most admirable
that the most careful thought in the world could have thought. And first
wants to know if the brave and never defeated is in this your castle
knight Don Quixote de la Mancha, in whose search he comes on foot and without
have breakfast from the kingdom of Candaya to this your state, which
you can and should have a miracle or by force of enchantment. She is at
door of this fortress or country house, and does not wait to enter but
your approval. I said.
And then he coughed and groped his beard up and down with both hands, and
with great calm he was attending to the duke's reply, which was:
-Ya, good squire Trifaldin de la Blanca Beard, we have had many days
news of the misfortune of my lady Countess Trifaldi, whom
charming people call her the Sorrowful Owner; well you can, great
squire, tell him to come in and here is the brave knight Don
Quixote de la Mancha, whose generous condition can be promised with
security all protection and all help; and you can also tell him from me
that if my favor is necessary for you, you should not miss it, because you already have me
forced to be a knight, to whom it is attached and concerned
favor all kinds of women, especially widowed owners,
bruised and sore, which your lordship must be.
Hearing which Trifaldin, bowed his knee to the ground, and, making
fife and signal drums to play, at the same they are and at the same pace as there was
entered, he returned to leave the garden, leaving everyone in awe of his
presence and composure. And, turning to Don Quixote, the duke said:
Well, famous gentleman, the darkness of malice and of
ignorance conceal and darken the light of courage and virtue. I say this
because only six days have your goodness been in this castle,
when they come to look for you from lueñas and secluded lands, and not in
floats or dromedaries, but on foot and fasting; the sad ones, the
afflicted, confident that they will find in that mighty arm the remedy of
their troubles and labors, thanks to your great deeds, which run and
they surround everything discovered on earth.
Don Quixote replied, I would like you to be here.
present that blessed religious man who at the table the other day showed that he had such
bad temper and such a bad grudge against knights errant, so that
I would see by sight of eyes if such gentlemen are necessary in the world:
touch, at least, with the hand that the extraordinarily afflicted and
disconsolate, in great cases and in enormous misfortunes they will not seek their
remedy to the houses of the lawyers, nor to the sacristans of the
villages, nor the gentleman who has never managed to leave the terms of his
place, nor the lazy courtier who before seeks new ones to refer and
tell them, who tries to do deeds and feats for others to tell and
write them; the remedy of troubles, the relief of needs, the
protection of the maidens, the consolation of widows, in any kind of
people are better than knights-errant, and if so I give
infinite thanks to heaven, and I consider any excess and
I work that in this so honorable exercise can happen to me. Come this owner
and ask what you want, that I will deliver your remedy in the strength of my
arm and in the fearless resolve of my spirited spirit.
Chapter XXXVII. Where the famous adventure of the Sorrowful owner continues
The duke and duchess were extremely pleased to see how well it was
responding to his intention Don Quixote, and at this time said Sancho:
-I would not want this lady owner to put any obstacle to the promise of
my government, because I have heard a Toledo apothecary say that he spoke
like a silguero that where owners intervened nothing could happen
good. Oh my God, and how wrong was this apothecary with them! Of what
I find out that, because all the owners are annoying and impertinent,
whatever quality and condition they are, what will be the ones that are sore,
How did they say that this Countess is Tres Faldas, or Tres Colas ?; in my
earth skirts and tails, tails and skirts, all is one.
`` Hush, Sancho friend, '' said Don Quixote, `` because this lady who owns so much
lueñes lands comes to look for me, it must not be one of those that the apothecary
had in their number, the more that this is a countess, and when the countesses
serve as owners, it will be serving queens and empresses, who in their
houses are very noble that are served by other owners.
Doña Rodríguez, who was present, responded to this:
-My mistress the Duchess has in her service, who could be
Countesses if fortune wanted, but there go laws do want kings; and
no one says ill of the dueñas, and more of the old ladies and maidens; that,
Although I am not, it is well enough for me and the advantage that
a maiden mistress makes a widowed mistress; and who sheared us,
the scissors remained in his hand.
"With all that," Sancho replied, "there is so much to shear in the dueñas,
According to my barber, how much better it is not to stir the rice, even if it sticks.
"Squires always," replied Dona Rodríguez, "are our enemies;
that, as they are goblins of the anterooms and see us at every step, the moments
who do not pray, there are many, they spend it on murmuring about us,
Digging up our bones and burying our fame Well, I send them to the
movable logs, which, no matter how bad it is, we have to live in the world, and in the
main houses, even if we starve and cover with a black nun
our delicate or not delicate meats, such as who covers or covers a
dunghill with a tapestry on procession day. By faith that if it were given to me, and the
time asked, that I imply, not only to those present, but to
everyone, how there is no virtue that is not enclosed in a mistress.
"I believe," said the Duchess, "that my good Dona Rodríguez is right, and very
big; but you should wait time to return for yourself and for the others
dueñas, to confuse the bad opinion of that bad apothecary, and
uproot the one that the great Sancho Panza has on his chest.
To which Sancho replied:
-After I have the fumes of a governor, the váguidos of
squire, and I am not given by how many owners there is a goat.
Go ahead with the dueñesco colloquy, if they did not hear that the freak and the
drums were beating again, where they understood that the Sorrowful owner
entered. The duchess asked the duke if it would be good to go and receive her, since
she was a countess and a principal person.
"Because of what she is countess," answered Sancho, before the duke
I would answer-, I am well that your greatness comes out to receive it; but
As for the owner, I am of the opinion that they do not move a step.
-Who brings you into this, Sancho? Don Quixote said.
"Who, sir?" Sancho answered. I get in, what can I get in, like
squire who has learned the terms of courtesy in the school of
your grace, who is the most courteous and well-bred gentleman in all
courtesy; and in these things, as I have heard from your mercy, both
it is lost by letter of more as by letter of less; and to the good listener,
few words.
"That's right, as Sancho says," said the duke, "we'll see the countess's size,
and for him we will test the courtesy that is owed to him.
In this, the drums and the freak entered, as the first time.
And here, with this short chapter, the author ended, and the other began,
following the same adventure, which is one of the most remarkable in history.
Chapter XXXVIII. Where the owner tells of her bad life
Sore
Behind the sad musicians they began to enter the garden ahead
up to twelve owners, spread over two rows, all dressed in
some wide nuns, apparently, full-bodied anascote, with some headdresses
white with thin canequí, so long that only the border of the monjil
they discovered. After them came the Countess Trifaldi, whom she brought by the hand
the Trifaldin squire of the White Beard, dressed in fine black
cloth to be frisked, which, to come frisada, would discover each grain of the great
of a chickpea of ​​the good ones from Martos. The tail, or skirt, or what to call it
they wanted, it had three points, which were supported in the hands of
three pages, also dressed in mourning, doing a showy and mathematical
figure with those three sharp angles that the three points formed, for
which fell all those who saw the pointed skirt that for her
Countess Trifaldi should call, as if we were to say the Countess of the Three
Skirts; and so Benengeli says that it was true, and that his own surname is
calls the Countess Lobuna, because many wolves were raised in her county,
and that if they were foxes as they were wolves, they would call her the Countess Zorruna, for
It will be customary in those parts to take the names of their
names of the thing or things in which their states abound most; however this
Countess, to favor the novelty of her skirt, left the Lobuna and took the
Trifaldi.
The twelve dueñas and the lady came in procession, covered the
faces with black veils and not transparent like Trifaldín's, but
so tight that nothing showed through.
Just as the squad owner, the Duke, the Duchess and Mr.
Quixote rose to their feet, and all those who in the spacious procession
they looked. The twelve dueñas stopped and made a street, through which the
Painful advanced, without leaving Trifaldín's hand, seeing which the
The Duke, the Duchess, and Don Quixote, advanced a work of twelve steps to
receive it. She, kneeling on the ground, with a voice before enough and
hoarse that subtle and diligent, she said:
-Your greatness be served by not doing so much courtesy to this his
raised; I say, to this her maid, because, as I am sore, I will not be right
to respond to what I owe, because my strange and never seen misery
It has taken the understanding I do not know where, and it must be very far, because
the more I look for him the less I find him.
`` Without him it would be, '' replied the duke, `` madam Countess, whoever did not discover
for your person your value, which, without further seeing, is worthy of
all the cream of courtesy and all the flower of the well-bred
ceremonies.
And, lifting her by the hand, he led her to seat her on a chair next to the
Duchess, who also received her with much restraint.
Don Quixote was silent, and Sancho was dead from seeing the face of the
Trifaldi and one of its many owners, but it was not possible until
they of his degree and will were discovered.
All calmed and silent, they were waiting who would give them
break, and was the Sorrowful owner with these words:
-I am confident, lord most powerful, most beautiful lady and most discreet
around, that my most care shall find in your most courageous
breasts fostering no less placid than generous and painful, because she is
such, that it is enough to soften the marbles, and to soften the diamonds,
and to grind the steels of the hardest hearts in the world; but,
Before I go out to the square of your ears, not to say ears, I would like
to let me know if he is in this guild, I run and company the
most holy knight Don Quixote de la Manchísima and his most
Belly.
-El Panza -before another answered, said Sancho- here it is, and the gift
Quixotísimo also; and thus, you will be able, most painful owner, to say what
I would like very much, that we are all ready and ready to be your
very servant.
In this Don Quixote arose, and, directing his reasons to the Sorrowful
owner said:
-If your worries, anguished lady, some hope can be promised
of remedy for some value or strength of some errant knight, here they are
mine, which, although thin and brief, will all be used in your
service. I am Don Quixote de la Mancha, whose task is to go to all
luck of the needy, and, this being so, as it is, you have no need,
Madam, capture benevolences or seek preambles, but, simply and without
detours, tell your evils, what ears listen to you that they will know, if not
remedy them, hurt them.
Hearing which, the Sorrowful owner made a sign of wanting to throw herself at the feet
Don Quixote, and even threw himself, and, struggling to embrace them, he said:
-Before these feet and legs I throw myself, oh undefeated knight!
which are bases and columns of the errant cavalry; these feet I want to kiss,
from whose steps hangs and hangs all the remedy for my misfortune, oh brave
errant, whose true faces leave behind and darken the fabulous of
the Amadises, Esplandianes and Belianises!
And, leaving Don Quixote, he turned to Sancho Panza, and, seizing his hands,
hands, he said:
-Oh you, the most loyal squire who ever served as a knight errant in the
present nor in past centuries, longer in goodness than the beard of
Trifaldín, my companion, who is present! You may well appreciate that in
Serve the great Don Quixote you serve in numbers to the whole group of knights
that have dealt with weapons in the world. Conjure you, for what you owe to your
most faithful kindness, be a good intercessor with your owner, so that later
favor this most humble and most unfortunate countess.
To which Sancho replied:
"That it be my goodness, my honor, as long and as big as the beard of
your squire, it does very little to me; bearded and with mustaches
may I have my soul when this life goes, what is important, which of the
Beards from here little or nothing heal me; but, without those socaliñas or prayers,
I will beg my master, that I know that he loves me well, and more now that he has
necessary for a certain business, which favors and helps your mercy in all
what I can. Your grace unpack your trouble and tell us, and let
do, that we will all understand each other.
The dukes burst out laughing at these things, like those who had
took the pulse of such an adventure, and praised each other the sharpness and
dissimulation of the Trifaldi, who, sitting down again, said:
- «From the famous kingdom of Candaya, which falls between the great Trapobana and the sea of
South, two leagues beyond Cape Comorín, Queen Dona
Mainz, widow of King Archipela, her lord and husband, from whose marriage
had and procreated the Infanta Antonomasia, heir to the kingdom, who
said infanta Antonomasia grew up and grew up under my tutelage and doctrine,
for being the oldest and the main owner of his mother. It happened,
then, that, going days and coming days, the girl Antonomasia reached the age of
fourteen years old, with such great perfection of beauty, that he could not raise it any more
knitted nature. Well let's just say that discretion was a brat!
She was discreet as well as beautiful, and she was the most beautiful in the world, and she is, if already
invidious fates and hardened fates have not cut the yarn
of the life. But there will not be, they will not allow the heavens to be done
as much evil to the earth as it would be to carry the cluster of the most
beautiful veduño from the ground. Of this beauty, and not as it should be appreciated
From my clumsy tongue, an infinite number of princes fell in love, thus
natural as foreigners, among whom he dared to raise the thoughts
to the heaven of such beauty a particular gentleman who was at court,
confident in his youth and bizarreness, and in his many skills and
thank you, and ease and happiness of wit; because I let your people know
greatness, if you don't have it out of anger, that he played a guitar that made it
talk, and more than that he was a poet and a great dancer, and knew how to make a cage of
birds, that only by doing them he could earn a living when he saw himself in
extreme need, that all these parts and thanks are enough to
bring down a mountain, not that a delicate maiden. But all his gentleness
and good grace and all his graces and abilities were little or none
part to surrender the strength of my girl, if the thief skinned not
I will use the remedy to surrender to me first. First the scoundrel wanted and
soulless wanderer earn my will and honor my taste, so that
I, a bad warden, gave him the keys to the fortress he kept. On
resolution: he flattered my understanding and surrendered my will with I do not know
what did you say and jump that gave me, but what made me prostrate and give the most
with me on the floor were some verses that I heard him sing one night since
a fence that fell into an alley where he was,
Okay, they said:
Of the sweet my enemy
an evil is born that hurts the soul,
and, for more torment, wants
to sit and not say.
It seemed to me the pearl trova, and her syrup voice, and then here, I say,
Since then, seeing the evil in which I fell for these and other similar
verses, I have considered that the good and concerted republics had
to banish poets, as Plato advised, at least the lascivious,
because they write some verses, not like those of the Marquis of Mantua, which
entertain and make women and children cry, but rather witty
that, like soft thorns, pierce your soul, and like rays
they wound on it, leaving the dress healthy. And again he sang:
Come death, so hidden
do not feel you come,
because the pleasure of dying
I did not turn to give my life.
And from this point on, other coplitas and bizarre tales, which are enchanting sung and written
suspend. Well, what when they humble themselves to compose a genre of verse that
In Candaya it was used then, who did they call Seguidillas? There it was
the leaping of souls, the frolicking of laughter, the restlessness of
bodies and, finally, the quicksilver of all the senses. And so I say,
my lords, that such rightly titled troubadours owed them
banish the islands of the lizards. But it is not their fault, but
the simple ones who praise them and the fools who believe them; and if I were the
good mistress that I should have, their outdated concepts were not to move me, nor
that saying was to be believed to be true: "I live dying, I burn in the yelo,
I tremble in the fire, I hope without hope, I depart and stay ", with others
impossible to do so, of which his writings are full. Well what when
promise the phoenix of Arabia, the crown of Aridiana, the horses of the Sun,
from the South the pearls, from Tíbar the gold and from Pancaya the balsam? This is where
they lengthen the pen more, as it costs them little to promise what ever
they think nor can they comply. But where do I have fun? Woe to me, unfortunate!
What madness or what nonsense leads me to count other people's faults, having
so much to say about mine? Woe is me, again, without luck!
they rendered the verses, but my simplicity; the music did not soften me,
but my lightness: my great ignorance and my little awareness opened the
road and cleared the path in the footsteps of Don Clavijo, that this is the
name of the referred gentleman; and thus, being I the party, he found
one and very many times in the stay of the by me, and not by him, deceived
Antonomasia, under the title of true husband; that, although sinful,
she would not allow that without being her husband she would come to the turn of the sole of
his slippers. No, no, not that: marriage must go forward in
any business I deal with! There was only damage to
this business, which was that of inequality, because Don Clavijo was a
private knight, and the Infanta Antonomasia heir, as I have already said,
of the kingdom. Some days it was covert and underhanded in the sagacity of my
I modesty this tangle, until it seemed to me that I was discovering it more
walk I do not know what swelling of the belly of Antonomasia, whose fear made us
enter the bureo at three, and left him who, before the
bad message, Don Clavijo asked the vicar for his wife Antonomasia,
in faith of a certificate that the Infanta had issued to him if she was his wife, noted
by my ingenuity, with such force, that those of Samson could not break it.
The proceedings were carried out, the vicar saw the card, the vicar took
confession to the lady, he confessed outright, ordered it to be deposited in the house of a
bailiff of a very honorable court ... »
At this time, Sancho said:
-Also in Candaya there are court bailiffs, poets and followers, so
I can swear that I imagine that all the world is one. But give yourself
Hurry, Mrs. Trifaldi, it's late and I'm dying to know the end
such a long history.
"Yes, I will," replied the countess.
Chapter XXXIX. Where the Trifaldi continues its wonderful and memorable
history
Whatever word Sancho said, the duchess liked it as much as
Don Quixote despaired; and, commanding him to be silent, the Sorrowful continued
saying:
- «In short, after many demands and answers, as the Infanta
He was always in his thirteen, without leaving or varying from the first statement,
the vicar ruled in favor of don Clavijo, and handed it over to him for his
legitimate wife, from which Queen Doña Mainz received so much anger,
mother of the Infanta Antonomasia, who will be buried in three days. "
"He must have died, without a doubt," said Sancho.
-Of course! replied Trifaldin, `` that in Candaya
living people, but dead ones.
`` It has already been seen, Señor Escudero, '' replied Sancho, `` bury a fainted
believing to be dead, and it seemed to me that Queen Mainz was bound
to faint rather than to die; that with life many things can be remedied,
and the infanta's nonsense was not so great that it forced us to feel him
so much. When that lady had married a page of hers, or with another
servant of his house, as many others have done, as I have heard, outside
the damage without remedy; but having married such a gentleman
gentleman and as understood as they have painted us here, in truth in
It is true that, although it was stupid, it was not as great as one thinks; because,
according to the rules of my lord, who is present and will not let me lie, well
as bishops are made of learned men, they can be made of
knights, and more if they are errant, kings and emperors.
`` You are right, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` because a knight-errant, like
have two fingers of luck, is in potential propincia to be the greatest
lord of the world. But, come on, the Sorrowful Lady, let me know
It transpires that he still has to tell the bitterness of this sweet story so far.
-And what if the bitterness remains! replied the Countess, `` and so bitter that in its
Tueras are sweet and oleanders are tasty. «Dead, then, the
queen, and not fainted, we bury her; and, we barely cover it with the earth
and we barely gave him the last voucher, when,
Would talia fando temperet a lachrymis?
placed on a wooden horse, it seemed above the grave of the
reigns the giant Malambruno, a Cormanian cousin of Mainz, who along with being
cruel was charming, who with his arts, in revenge for the death of his
Cormana, and as punishment for Don Clavijo's daring, and out of spite of
the excess of Antonomasia, left them enchanted on the same grave:
she, turned into a bronze jimia, and he, into a hideous crocodile
of an unknown metal, and between the two is a pattern, also of metal,
and on it written in the Syriac language some letters which, having declared themselves in
the candayesca, and now in the Castilian, enclose this sentence: "No
these two daring lovers will take their first form until the brave
manchego come to my hands in a singular battle, that for only your
great value keep this adventure never seen before. "This done, he took out
from the scabbard a wide and inordinate cutlass, and, clinging to me by the
hair, he made a pretense of wanting to cut my throat and cut off my head.
I was disturbed, my voice stuck to my throat, I was pouty all over the place, but,
Still, I tried my best, and in a trembling, aching voice, I
I said so many and such things, that they made him suspend the execution of so
severe punishment. Finally, he brought before him all the owners of
the palace, which were these that are present, and, after having
exaggerated our guilt and reviled the conditions of the owners, their
bad tricks and worse traces, and loading everyone the guilt that I alone had,
He said that he did not want to punish us with capital punishment, but with other penalties
dilated, that they give us a civil and continuous death; and, in that same
moment and point that he finished saying this, we all felt that they opened up to us
the pores of the face, and that all over it they pricked us as with tips of
needles. Then we go with our hands to the faces, and find ourselves in the
so now you will see. »
And then Painful and the other owners raised the masks with which
covers came, and uncovered faces, all covered in beards,
which are blondes, which are black, which are white and which are studded, whose
view showed the duke and duchess to be amazed, astonished don
Quixote and Sancho, and everyone present astonished.
And Trifaldi continued:
- «In this way we were punished by that messy and malicious Malambruno,
covering the softness and morbidity of our faces with the roughness of these
sows, that plugged the sky that before with its excessive cutlass we
would have knocked down the heads, not that we were amazed by the light of our
faces with this blur that covers us; because if we take into account, gentlemen
mine (and what I am going to say now I would like to say made my eyes
sources, but the consideration of our misfortune, and the seas that until
here it has rained, they are humorless and dry as edges, and so, I'll say it
without tears), I say, then, that where can a mistress with a beard go? That
father or mother will hurt from it? Who will help her? Well, even though
He has a smooth complexion and a face martyred with a thousand kinds of concoctions and
mute, she hardly finds someone who loves her well, what will she do when she discovers done
a forest his face? Oh my mistresses and companions, in unfortunate point
we were born, in a lesser hour our parents begot us! »
And, saying this, he showed signs of fainting.
Chapter XL. Of things that pertain and touch this adventure is already here
memorable story
Really and truly, everyone who likes such stories as
They should be grateful to Cide Hamete, its first author, for the
curiosity that he had in telling us the semiminimas of it, without leaving anything, for
how small that it was, that he did not bring it to light differently: he paints the
thoughts, discover imaginations, respond to unspoken ones, clarify
the doubts, solve the arguments; finally, the atoms of the most curious
manifest desire. Oh famous author! Oh happy Don Quixote! Oh
Famous Dulcinea! Oh funny Sancho Panza! All together and each one by
yes you live infinite centuries, for the pleasure and general pastime of the
living.
Thus, the story says that, just as Sancho saw the Sorrowful faint,
said:
-By the faith of a good man, I swear, and by the century of all my past
Panzas, which I have never heard or seen, nor has my master told me, nor in his
thought has fit, such an adventure like this. Save yourself a thousand satans,
for not cursing you for charming and giant, Malambruno; and didn't you find another
kind of punishment to give to these sinners if not to barbar them? How and
it was not better, and it would be more relevant to them, to take away half of
the noses from the middle up, even if they spoke gnarly, that they should not put
beards? I'll bet they don't have an estate to pay whoever kills them.
"That is the truth, sir," replied one of the twelve, "that we have no
farm to peel us; and so we have taken some of us for
thrifty remedy of using a few sticky globs or patches, and
applying them to the faces, and pulling at once, we are as flat and smooth as
stone mortar bottom; that, since there are women in Candaya who
they go from house to house to remove hair and polish eyebrows and do other
concoctions concerning women, we the owners of my lady for ever
we wanted to admit them, because the most sniff third parties, having stopped
be cousins; and if by Mr. Don Quixote we are not remedied, with beards
they will take us to the grave.
`` I would peel mine, '' said Don Quixote, `` in the land of the Moors, if not
remedy yours.
At this point, Trifaldi came back from her faint and said:
-The ring of promises, brave knight, in the midst of my fainting came
to my ears, and it has been a part for me to return and collect all my
senses; And so, I beg you again, illiterate walker and indomitable lord,
your gracious promise becomes work.
"For me it will not remain," replied Don Quixote, "see, ma'am, what is it that
I have to do, that the spirit is very ready to serve you.
-It is the case -answered the Sorrowful -that from here to the kingdom of Candaya, if
it goes by land, there are five thousand leagues, two more or less; but if it goes by
the air and for the straight line, there are three thousand and twelve hundred and twenty-seven. It is
also to know that Malambruno told me that when luck came to me
knight our deliverer, that he would send him a horse fed
better and with less malice than those that are return, because it has to be
that very wooden horse on which the brave Pierres carried stolen
to the pretty Magalona, ​​whose horse is governed by a peg that has in
the forehead, which serves as a brake, and flies through the air so lightly
It seems that the same devils take him. This such horse, as it is
ancient tradition, it was composed by that wise Merlin; lent to
Pierres, who was his friend, with whom he made great trips, and stole, as
he said, to the pretty Magalona, ​​carrying her on her haunches through the air, leaving
enthralled all those who looked at them from the ground; and did not lend but to
who he wanted, or better paid; and from the great Pierres to
now we do not know that any of them have risen on it. From there he got him
Malambruno with his arts, and has him in his power, and uses him in his
trips, which he makes at times, around the world, and today
He is here and tomorrow in France and another day in Potosí; and it's good that he
such a horse neither eats, nor sleeps nor wears horseshoes, and wears a carrier for
the airs, without having wings, that the one who wears can carry a cup
filled with water in your hand without spilling a drop, as you walk flat and
restful; for which the beautiful Magalona was very happy to walk a horse
at.
To this Sancho said:
-To walk calm and flat, my gray, since it does not walk through the air;
but on earth, I will cut him off with how many bearers there are in the world.
They all laughed, and the Sorrowful continued:
-And this such horse, if Malambruno wants to end our
Unfortunately, before it is half an hour into the night, it will be in our
presence, because he meant to me that the sign that he would give me where I
understood that I had found the gentleman I was looking for, it would be to send me the
horse, wherever it was with comfort and alacrity.
-And how many can fit on that horse? asked Sancho.
La Dolorida replied:
-Two people: one on the chair and the other on the haunches; and, for the major
part, these two such persons are knight and squire, when there is no
some stolen maiden.
`` I would like to know, Senora Dolorida, '' said Sancho, `` what is the name of that
horse.
The name, replied the Sorrowful one, is not like the horse of Belorofonte,
called Pegasus, nor like that of the Great Alexander, called Bucephalus, nor
like that of the furious Orlando, whose name was Brilladoro, not least Bayarte,
which was that of Reinaldos de Montalbán, nor Frontino, like that of Rugero, nor
Bootes ni Peritoa, as they say those of the Sun are called, nor do they
called Orelia, like the horse on which the unfortunate Rodrigo, last king of
the Goths, entered the battle where he lost his life and the kingdom.
"I'll bet," said Sancho, "that they haven't given him any famous wishes.
names of horses so well known, that they will not have given him that of my master either,
Rocinante, which in being its own exceeds all those who have been named.
`` Yes, '' replied the bearded countess, `` but it still suits her a lot,
because he is called Clavileño el Alígero, whose name agrees with the being of
log, and with the peg that he carries in his forehead, and with the lightness with which
walk; and thus, as for the name, it may well compete with the famous
Rocinante.
`` I am not dissatisfied with the name, '' replied Sancho, `` but with what brake or with
what jáquima is governed?
`` I have already said, '' replied Trifaldi, `` that with the plug, that, turning it to
one part or another, the gentleman on top makes him walk as he wants,
or already in the air, or already tracking and almost sweeping the earth, or by the
medium, which is the one that is sought and must be had in all actions well
ordered.
-I would like to see it -answered Sancho-, but to think that I have to go up in
he, neither in the saddle nor on the haunches, is asking for pears from the elm tree. Good is that
I can hardly keep myself in my white, and on a packet softer than the
the same silk, and now they would like me to have myself on some board legs, without
cushion or pillow! Pardiez, I'm not going to grind to remove the
anyone's beard: everyone shaves as best suits him, that I don't
I plan to accompany my lord on such a long journey. How much more, that I should not
to make the case for the shaving of these beards as I am for him
disenchantment with my lady Dulcinea.
"Yes, you are, friend," replied Trifaldi, "and so much so that, without your
presence, I understand that we will do nothing.
"This is the king!" said Sancho, "what do squires have to do with
adventures of their lords? Are they to bear the fame of those who end,
and do we have to carry the work? Body of me! Even if the
historians: "This gentleman ended such and such adventure, but with
help of so-and-so, his squire, without whom it would be impossible to finish it. "
But let them write simply: "Don Paralipomenón de las Tres Estrellas is over
the adventure of the six vestiges ", without naming the person of his
squire, who was present at everything, as if it were not in the world!
Now, gentlemen, I say again that my lord can go alone, and good
It may be good for you, that I will stay here, in the company of the Duchess my
madam, and it might be that when he returned the cause of the
Mrs. Dulcinea in third and fifth; because I think, in idle moments and
unemployed, give me a round of spanking that does not cover my hair.
-With all that, you have to accompany him if necessary, good Sancho,
because good people will beg you; that will not remain because of your useless fear
the faces of these ladies are so full; which, true, would be a bad case.
-Here of the king again! Sancho replied. When this charity was done
by some collected maidens, or by some girls of doctrine,
man might venture to any job, but let him suffer it for
removing beards from owners, bad year! More that I saw them all with
beards, from the largest to the smallest, and from the finest to the most
repulsed.
`` You are bad with the owners, Sancho my friend, '' said the Duchess, `` you are leaving a lot
after the opinion of the Toledo apothecary. Well, by faith you are not right; that
there are owners in my house who can be an example of owners, here is my
Doña Rodríguez, who won't let me say anything else.
"More than your Excellency say it," said Rodríguez, "God knows the
true of everything, and good or bad, bearded or hairless that we are as
Dueñas, our mother also gave birth to us like the other women; and so
God cast us into the world, He knows why, and I abide by his mercy,
and not to anyone's beard.
Now, Senora Rodríguez, said Don Quixote, and Senora Trifaldi and
company, I hope in heaven that it will look kindly on your troubles,
that Sancho will do what I send him, if Clavileño came and saw me
with Malambruno; that I know that there would be no razor that could shave more easily
to your mercies as my sword would shave the head of
Malambruno; that God suffers the bad, but not forever.
-Oh! -said the Sorrowful at this time-, with benign eyes look at your
greatness, brave knight, all the stars of the celestial regions,
and instill in your spirit all prosperity and courage to be a shield and
Shelter of the vituperative and dejected genre that owns it, abominated by apothecaries,
murmured by squires and undermined by pages; What a bad thing there is the mischief that
In the prime of her age, she did not become a nun first than a mistress.
Woe to us, the owners, who, even if we come by straight line,
from male to male, from Hector the Trojan himself, they won't stop throwing you a
you our ladies, if they thought they were queens for that! Oh giant
Malambruno, who, although you are charming, you are very accurate in your promises!
send us now to the unparalleled Clavileño, so that our misery ends, that
if the heat enters and these our beards last, cool of our luck!
Trifaldi said this with so much feeling that she drew tears from
eyes of all the bystanders, and even swept those of Sancho, and proposed in
his heart to accompany his lord to the last parts of the world, yes
it is that it consisted of removing the wool from those venerable faces.
Chapter XLI. Of the coming of Clavileño, with the end of this long adventure
The night came here, and with it the determined point at which the famous
Clavileño horse came, whose delay already tired Don Quixote,
It seemed to him that, since Malambruno was stopping to send him, or that he was not
the knight for whom that adventure was saved, or that Malambruno
He did not dare to come with him to a singular battle. But you see here when out of time
Four savages entered the garden, all dressed in ivy green,
on their shoulders they carried a large wooden horse. They put him on his feet in
the ground, and one of the savages said:
-Come on this machine whoever has the courage to do so.
"Here," said Sancho, "I won't go up, because I don't have the courage nor am I a knight."
And the savage continued saying:
-And let the squire occupy the haunches, if he has one, and trust the brave
Malambruno, that if it were not from his sword, from any other, or from another
malice, he will be offended; and there is no more to twist this peg than on the
he wears his neck, that he will carry them through the air where he attends them
Malambruno; but, because the highness and sublimity of the road does not cause them
váguidos, they have to cover their eyes until the horse neighs, which will be
sign of having ended their journey.
This being said, leaving Clavileño, with a gentle continent they turned for
where they had come from. La Dolorida, just as she saw the horse, almost with
tears said to Don Quixote:
Courageous gentleman, Malambruno's promises have been true: the
horse is at home, our beards are growing, and each one of us and with
each hair of them we beg you to shave and cut, because it is not in more but
in that you get on it with your squire and happy beginning to your new
trip.
-That I will do, Countess Trifaldi, very willingly and of the best
mood, without taking a cushion, or putting on spurs, for not stopping:
so much is the desire that I have to see you, lady, and all these owners
rasas y mondas.
`` I won't do that, '' said Sancho, `` neither badly nor in a good mood.
way; And if this shaving cannot be done without me going up to the
haunches, my lord may well look for another squire to accompany him, and these
ladies another way to smooth your faces; that I am not a witch, to please
of walking through the air. And what will my Insulans say when they know that their
Governor is walking through the winds? And one more thing: that having
three thousand and so many leagues from here to Candaya, if the horse tires or the
giant gets angry, it will take us to turn around half a dozen years, and
there will be neither islands nor islands in the world that know me; and, well it is said
commonly that in the delay there is danger, and that when they give you the
you go with the rope, forgive me the beards of these ladies, who
Saint Peter is well in Rome; I want to say how good I am in this
house, where so much mercy is done me and whose owner I hope so great good
how it is to see me governor.
To which the duke said:
-Sancho amigo, the island that I have promised you is not movable or fugitive:
Its roots are so deep, thrown into the depths of the earth, that
They will start or move from where it is to three jerks; and, well, you know that
I know that there is no genre of trade of the highest numbers that I do not know
farm with some kind of bribe, what more, what less, the one that I
I want to take this government is that you go with your Lord Don Quixote to
to top and end this memorable adventure; that now you come back on
Clavileño with the brevity that his lightness promises, pray the opposite fortune
bring you back and forth on foot, made rosemary, from inn to inn and for sale in
sale, whenever you return you will find your island where you leave it, and
to your insulans with the same desire to receive you by their governor who
they have always had, and my will will be the same; and do not doubt this
It is true, Señor Sancho, that it would be to make a notorious offense to the desire that
I have to serve you.
"No more, sir," said Sancho, "I am a poor squire and I cannot carry
you cost so many courtesies; come up my master, cover these eyes and entrust me to
God, and let me know if when we go for these arrogances I can entrust myself to
Our Lord or invoke the angels to favor me.
To which Trifaldi replied:
-Sancho, you may well entrust yourself to God or whoever you want, that
Malambruno, although charming, is Christian, and does his incantations
with a lot of sagacity and a lot of care, without messing with anyone.
"Hey, then," said Sancho, "God help me and the Holy Trinity of Gaeta!"
`` Since the memorable adventure of the fullers, '' said Don Quixote, `` I have never
I looked at Sancho with as much fear as I do now, and if I were as ominous as
others, his cowardice tickled my spirits. But
come here, Sancho, I want to speak to you with the permission of these gentlemen
put two words aside.
And, separating Sancho among some trees in the garden and grabbing both his
hands, he said:
-You see, Sancho brother, the long journey that awaits us, and what does God know?
when will we return from him, nor the comfort and space that the
business; Well, I would like you to retire now in your room, how are you going?
to look for something necessary for the road, and, in a day the straws,
you give yourself, to good account of the three thousand and three hundred lashes to which you are
forced, even five hundred, what dice you will have, that the beginning
things is having them half finished.
"Dear God," said Sancho, "your mercy must be diminished!" This is
like what they say: "in a hurry you see me and maiden you demand me!"
Now that I have to go sitting on a clean slate, does your grace want me to
did my poses hurt? In truth in truth it does not have your mercy
reason. Now we are going to shave these owners, that when I return I promise to
Your grace, as who I am, to give me such a rush to get out of my
Obligation, may your grace be content, and I do not say more.
And Don Quixote replied:
-Well, with that promise, good Sancho, I am comforted, and I believe that you will fulfill it,
because, indeed, although foolish, you are a true man.
`` I'm not green, but brown, '' said Sancho, `` but even if it was mixed,
keep my word.
And with this they went back up in Clavileño, and when they got up Don Quixote said:
-Tapaos, Sancho, and go up, Sancho, who from such lueñes lands sends for
we will not be to deceive ourselves, for the little glory that can redound
to deceive those who trust him; and, since everything happened the other way around
I imagine, the glory of having undertaken this feat will not be
to hide any malice.
`` Come on, sir, '' said Sancho, `` the beards and tears of these ladies
I have nailed in the heart, and I will not eat a bite that knows me well until
see them in their first smoothness. Get on your mercy and cover yourself first, that if I
I have to go to the haunches, of course the one in the chair goes up first.
"That is the truth," replied Don Quixote.
And, taking a handkerchief from his skirt, he asked La Dolorida to
covered his eyes very well, and, having covered them, he turned to
discover and said:
-If I remember correctly, I have read in Virgilio that of the Paladion of
Troy, which was a wooden horse that the Greeks presented to the goddess
Pallas, which was pregnant with armed knights, who were later the
total ruin of Troy; and thus, it will be good to see first what Clavileño brings in
his stomach.
`` There is no reason, '' said the Sorrowful, `` I trust him and I know that Malambruno does not
there is nothing malicious or traitorous about it; your grace, Mr. Don Quixote,
come up without any fear, and to my harm if any happen to you.
It seemed to Don Quixote that whatever he replied about his
safety would be detrimental to their bravery; and so, without further altercation,
He climbed on Clavileño and was tempted by the peg, which easily surrounded itself; and,
since he had no stirrups and his legs dangled, he looked like nothing more than the figure of
Flemish tapestry painted or woven in some Roman triumph. In a bad mood and
little by little Sancho came up, and, settling himself as best he could in the
haunches, found them somewhat hard and not at all soft, and asked the duke if
if possible, they would accommodate him with a cushion or pillow, even if
whether from the dais of his mistress the duchess, or from the bed of some page,
because the haunches of that horse looked more like marble than wood.
To this Trifaldi said that no jaez or any kind of adornment suffered
about himself Clavileño; that what he could do was put on a womanizer, and that
that way I wouldn't feel the harshness so much. Sancho did so, and, saying "to God,"
he allowed himself to be blindfolded, and, after being blindfolded, he rediscovered himself,
and, looking at everyone in the garden tenderly and with tears, said that
help in that trance with their parents and respective Hail Marys, because
God forbid who would say them for them when in such trances they
see. To which Don Quixote said:
-Thief, are you hanging by any chance, or in the last term of
life, to use such prayers? Aren't you heartless and cowardly
creature, in the same place that the pretty Magalona occupied, from which she descended,
not to the grave, but to be queen of France, if the
stories? And I, who go to your side, can I not get to the one of the brave
Pierres, who oppressed this very place that I now oppress? Get covered,
Take cover, disheartened animal, and don't let the fear you have come to your mouth,
at least in my presence.
"Cover me," answered Sancho; and, well, they do not want me to entrust myself to God or
that is entrusted, how much fear is there not some region of
Hell, give us in Peralvillo?
They covered themselves, and, don Quixote feeling that he was as he should be, tempted
the peg, and had hardly put his fingers on it, when all the
Dueñas and all those present raised their voices, saying:
"God guide you, brave knight!"
"God be with you, fearless squire!"
-Yeah, you're going through those airs, breaking them faster than an arrow!
-You are already beginning to suspend and admire how many from the earth are
looking!
"Hold on, brave Sancho, you are swaying!" Look, do not fall, it will be worse
your fall than that of the daring young man who wanted to rule the chariot of the Sun, his
dad!
Sancho heard the voices, and, clasping with his master and girdling him with
arms, he said:
-Sir, how do these say that we are going so high, if their voices reach here, and
They don't seem like they are here talking next to us?
-Don't notice that, Sancho, since these things and these poultry go
out of the ordinary courses, from a thousand leagues you will see and hear what
you want And do not squeeze me so much, that you knock me down; and I really don't know
What are you troubled or frightened of, that I will dare to swear that in all the days of
my life I have ridden on a flatter step horse: it does not seem but not
we move from a place. Banish, friend, fear, which, indeed, the
things are going as they should go and the wind we carry in our stern.
"That's the truth," answered Sancho, "that this side gives me such a
strong, it seems that a thousand bellows are blowing me.
And so it was, that some large bellows were making him air: so well
plotted was such an adventure by the Duke and Duchess and their butler,
that he did not lack a requirement that he stop making it perfect.
Feeling, then, don Quixote blow, he said:
-Without any doubt, Sancho, we must already reach the second region of the
air, where hail and snow are generated; the thunder, the
Lightning bolts and lightning are spawned in the third region, and if this
way we go up, soon we will hit the fire region, and I don't know
how to temper this peg so that we do not go up where we are abraded.
In this, with light tows to turn on and off, from afar,
earrings from a reed warmed their faces. Sancho, who felt the
heat said:
-That they kill me if we are not already in the place of the fire, or close, because
a large part of my beard has been scorched, and I am, sir, for
discover me and see where we are.
Don Quixote answered, and remember the true story of the
Torralba, who was carried by the devils flying through the air,
knight on a reed, eyes closed, and in twelve hours he reached Rome, and
got off at Torre de Nona, which is a street in the city, and saw all the
failure and assault and death of Bourbon, and by morning he was back in
Madrid, where he gave an account of everything he had seen; which also said
that when he was going through the air the devil commanded him to open his eyes, and
opened, and he saw himself so close, in his opinion, to the body of the moon, that the
could grasp with his hand, and that he did not dare to look at the earth for not
fade off. So, Sancho, there is no reason to discover us; what, who
takes us in charge, he will account for us, and maybe we are taking tips
and rising high to let us fall from one on the kingdom of Candaya,
as the sacre or neblí does on the heron to catch it, no matter how much
ski lift; and, although it seems to us that it has not been half an hour since we started from
garden, believe me we must have made a great path.
"I don't know what it is," replied Sancho Panza, "I can only say that if the lady
Magellan or Magalona was satisfied with these legs, which must not have been very
tender of meats.
All these talks of the two mighty men heard the Duke and Duchess and the
of the garden, of which they received extraordinary content; and, wanting to give
finish off the strange and well-made adventure, by Clavileño's tail he
they set fire with some tow, and to the point, because the horse was full of
rocket rockets flew through the air, with a strange noise, and struck
Quixote and Sancho Panza on the ground, half scorched.
By this time all bearded men had already disappeared from the garden.
squad of the dueñas and the Trifaldi and everything, and those of the garden were
as if passed out, lying on the ground. Don Quixote and Sancho got up
battered, and, looking everywhere, they were astonished to see themselves in the
the very garden from which they had departed and to see so much
number of people; and his admiration grew more when, on one side of the garden
they saw a great spear thrust into the ground and hanging over it and two
green silk cords a smooth white parchment, in which, with large
letters of gold, the following was written:
The illustrious knight Don Quixote de la Mancha passed away and the adventure ended
of Countess Trifaldi, by another name called the Sorrowful Duenna, and
company, just by trying.
Malambruno is satisfied and satisfied with all his will, and the beards
of the dueñas are now smooth and smooth, and the kings Don Clavijo and
Antonomasia in its pristine state. And, when the squire is fulfilled
vápulo, the white dove will be freed from the pestiferous gyrfalcons that
they chase, and in the arms of their beloved cooler; That is how it is ordered by
the wise Merlin, proto-charmer of the charmers.
Don Quixote, then, having read the letters on the parchment, of course he understood
that they spoke of Dulcinea's disenchantment; and, giving thanks to heaven
that with so little danger so great a date would have ended, reducing his
past complexion the faces of the venerable owners, who no longer seemed, left
where the Duke and Duchess had not yet come to their senses, and,
hand to the duke, he said:
-Hey, good sir, good cheer; good cheer, everything is nothing! Adventure is
already finished without damage to the bars, as the writing clearly shows that in
that standard is set.
The Duke, little by little, and as one who remembers from a heavy dream, was
coming to his senses, and by the same tenor the Duchess and all those who by him
garden were fallen, with such displays of wonder and awe, that almost
they could be made to understand that they had really happened what so well
they knew how to pretend to tease. The duke read the poster with his eyes half
closed, and then, with open arms, went to embrace Don Quixote,
telling him to be the best gentleman that in any century had been seen.
Sancho was looking at La Dolorida, to see what face she had without the
beards, and if she was as beautiful without them as her gallant disposition
promised, but they told him that, just as Clavileño went down burning through the
airs and hit the ground, the entire squad of the dueñas, with the Trifaldi,
It had disappeared, and that they were already shaved and without cannons. Asked the
Duchess to Sancho that how it had gone on that long journey. To the Which
Sancho replied:
-I, madam, I felt that we were going, according to my lord told me, flying through the
region of fire, and I wanted to uncover my eyes a little, but my master,
Whoever asked for a license to discover me, did not consent to it; but I, what do I have?
I know what bits of curious and wanting to know what is hindering and preventing me,
beautifully and without anyone seeing it, under my nose I pushed so much
how much the scarf that covered my eyes, and there I looked towards the
earth, and it seemed to me that all of it was no bigger than a mustard seed, and
the men who walked on it, little bigger than hazelnuts; because I know
see how high we must have gone then.
To this the Duchess said:
-Sancho friend, look what you say, that, it seems, you do not wear the
earth, but the men who walked on it; and it is clear that if the
The earth seemed to you like a mustard seed, and each man like a
hazelnut, one man alone was to cover the whole earth.
`` That is true, '' answered Sancho, `` but with all that, I discovered it by a
little boy, and I saw it all.
`` Look, Sancho, '' said the Duchess, `` you can't see all of it on one side.
that you look at.
"I don't know those looks," replied Sancho, "I only know that it will be good for your
Your Honor, understand that, as we flew by enchantment, by enchantment
I could see all the earth and all men wherever they
look; And if this is not believed, your grace will not believe how,
discovering myself by the eyebrows, I saw myself so close to the sky that there was no
from me to him an inch and a half, and as far as I can swear, my lady, that is very
great also. And it happened that we were going to the part where seven o'clock are
cabrillas; and in God and in my soul that, like me in my childhood I was in my
goat land, that just as I saw them, I wanted to entertain myself with
them for a while ...! And if it doesn't comply, it seems to me that it will burst. Come,
Well, and I drink, and what do I do? Without saying anything to anyone, not to my lord either,
beautifully and passively I got off Clavileño, and entertained myself with the
cabrillas, which are like wallflowers and flowers, almost three-quarters
hour, and Clavileño did not move from a place, nor did he go forward.
"And while good Sancho entertained himself with the goats," asked the
Duke, what was Mr. Don Quixote entertaining himself in?
To which Don Quixote replied:
-As all these things and these such events go outside the natural order,
It is not much that Sancho says what he says. I know how to say that I didn't even discover myself
neither high nor low, nor did I see the sky nor the earth, nor the sea nor the sands.
It is true that I felt that I was passing through the region of the air, and even
it touched the fire; but that we went from there I can't believe it, well,
being the region of fire between the sky of the moon and the last region
of the air, we could not reach the sky where the seven white goats are
Sancho says, without burning us; and, well, we don't get scared, or Sancho lies or
Sancho dreams.
`` I'm neither lying nor dreaming, '' answered Sancho, `` if not, ask me for the
such goats, and by them they will see if I tell the truth or not.
"Say them then, Sancho," said the duchess.
`` They are, '' answered Sancho, `` the two green, the two red, the two blue,
and one of mix.
`` That is a new way of goats, '' said the duke, `` and through this our region
from the ground such colors are not used; I mean goats of such colors.
"That is very clear," said Sancho; Yes, what difference must there be from the
goats from the sky to those on the ground.
"Tell me, Sancho," asked the duke, "did you see there among those goats
some bastard?
`` No, sir, '' answered Sancho, `` but I heard that none of the
horns of the moon.
They did not want to ask him more about his trip, because it seemed to them that he
Sancho thread of walking through all the heavens, and giving news of how much there
passed by, without having moved from the garden.
In resolution, this was the end of the adventure of the Sorrowful owner, who gave
to laugh at the dukes, not only that time, but that of his whole life, and that
count Sancho centuries, if he lived them; and, when Don Quixote came to Sancho,
in his ear he said:
-Sancho, because you want to believe what you have seen in heaven,
I want you to believe for me what I saw in the Montesinos cave; and no
I tell you more.
Chapter XLII. From the advice that Don Quixote gave to Sancho Panza before
was to rule the island, with other things well considered
With the happy and graceful event of the Sorrowful adventure, they were so
happy the dukes, who determined to go ahead with the jeers,
seeing the well-off subject that they had so that they had to be true; and
thus, having given the trace and orders that his servants and his vassals had
to save with Sancho in the government of the promised island, another day, that
was the one that happened to Clavileño's flight, the duke told Sancho that he
thin and compose to go to be governor, that already his insulans
They were waiting like May water. Sancho humiliated himself and said:
-After I came down from the sky, and after from its high summit I looked at the
earth and I saw it so small, the desire I had so
great to be governor; because, what greatness is to command in a grain of
mustard, or what dignity or empire to rule half a dozen men
sizes like hazelnuts, which, in my opinion, there were no more in all the earth?
If your lordship were served by giving me so much of heaven,
even if it were not more than half a league, I would take it more willingly than the greatest
island of the world.
`` Look, friend Sancho, '' replied the duke, `` I cannot give part of the sky.
to no one, even if it is not bigger than a fingernail, that only God is reserved
those mercedes and thanks. What I can give I give you, which is an island made and
straight, round and well proportioned, and exceedingly fertile and abundant,
where if you know how to give yourself skill, you can with the riches of the earth
win those of heaven.
"Now then," answered Sancho, "come on that island, I will strive to be
such a governor that, despite being mischievous, I go to heaven; and this is not for
greed that I have to go out of my boxes or to get up when I grow up,
but because of the desire I have to prove what being governor tastes like.
`` If you try it once, Sancho, '' said the duke, `` eat your hands behind
the government, since it is a very sweet thing to command and be obeyed. Good
sure that when your owner becomes emperor, that he will be without
doubt, as their things are directed, that they will not rip it out anyway, and
that it hurts and weighs him in half of the soul of the time that he would have left
to be.
`` Sir, '' Sancho replied, `` I imagine it is good to command, even a
herd of cattle.
`` With you they bury me, Sancho, you know everything, '' replied the duke, `` and
I hope you will be such a governor as your judgment promises, and stay
this here and warn that tomorrow on that same day you will go to the government
of the island, and this afternoon they will accommodate you with the suitable suit that you have
to carry and all the necessary things to your departure.
`` Dress me, '' said Sancho, `` as you wish, that in any way
dressed I will be Sancho Panza.
That is true, said the duke, but the suits have to be accommodated with the
profession or dignity that is professed, that it would not be good for a lawyer to
dress like a soldier, nor a soldier like a priest. You, Sancho, you will go
dressed part of a lawyer and part of a captain, because in the island that I give you
both weapons and letters are necessary, and letters and weapons.
"Letters," Sancho replied, "I have few, because I still don't know the A, B, C; but
it is enough for me to have the Christus in my memory to be a good governor. Of the
I will handle the weapons they give me, until I fall, and God ahead.
"With such a good memory," said the duke, "Sancho will not be able to err in anything."
Don Quixote arrived at this, and, knowing what was happening and the speed with which
Sancho had to leave for his government, with permission from the Duke he took him for
He shook his hand and went with him to his room, with the intention of advising him on how to
there had to be in his office.
So when they entered his room, he closed the door behind him, and did almost
Sancho was forced to sit next to him, and with a calm voice he said:
-Infinite thanks I give to heaven, Sancho friend, that, before and first
I have found some good happiness, I have come to you to receive and
to find good fortune. I, who in my good luck had you delivered
the payment of your services, I see myself in the principles of getting ahead, and you,
ahead of time, against the law of reasonable speech, you are rewarded with
your wishes. Others bribe, pester, request, get up early, beg,
they persist, and they do not achieve what they want; and another arrives, and without knowing how or
of course, he finds himself with the position and office that many others sought; and
here comes in and it fits well to say that there is good and bad fortune in
claims. You, who for me, without a doubt, are a joint, without getting up early
nor stay up late and without doing any diligence, with only the breath that has
headdress of the errant cavalry, without further ado you see yourself as governor of a
insula, as one who says nothing. All this I say, oh Sancho!
attribute to your merits the mercy received, but give thanks to the
heaven, which gently arranges things, and then you will give them to greatness
which in itself contains the profession of cavalry errant. Willing, then,
the heart to believe what I have told you, is, oh son, attentive to this you
Cato, who wants to advise you and be the north and guide that will direct you and take you out
safe port of this stormy sea where you are going to engulf yourself; that trades and
great offices are nothing but a deep gulf of confusion.
First of all, oh son, you have to fear God, because in fearing him is the
wisdom, and being wise you will not be able to err in anything. The second, you have to put
eyes on who you are, trying to know yourself, which is the most
difficult knowledge you can imagine. From knowing you will come out the no
swell like the frog that wanted to match the ox, that if you do this,
the consideration of having
kept pigs in your land.
"That's the truth," answered Sancho, "but it was when he was a boy; but
later, something little man, geese were those that I kept, that not pigs;
but this seems to me that it is not the case, that not all those who govern
They come from the caste of kings.
"That is true," replied Don Quixote, "for which reason those who are not in principle
nobles must accompany the gravity of the position they exercise with a soft
gentleness that, guided by prudence, frees them from gossip
malicious, from whom there is no state that escapes. Show off, Sancho, of the
humility of your lineage, and do not despise yourself to say that you come from
labradors; because, seeing that you do not run, no one will start to run;
and pride yourself more on being a humble virtuous than a proud sinner. Countless
are those who, born of low stock, have risen to the highest dignity
pontifical and imperative; and this truth could bring you so many examples,
to tire you out. Look, Sancho: if you take virtue through, and you pride yourself
to do virtuous deeds, there is no need to be envious of those who
have princes and lords, because blood is inherited and virtue is
Aquista, and virtue alone is worth what blood is not worth. Being this
Well, as it is, that if I come to see you when you are on your island
any of your relatives, do not dismiss him or offend him; before you have to
welcome, entertain and give away, that with this you will satisfy heaven, who likes that
no one despises what he did, and you will repay what you owe to the
well-concerted nature. If you take your wife with you (because it's not
well that those who attend governments for a long time are without the
teach it, teach it, and strip it of its natural rudeness, because
everything that a discreet governor usually acquires usually loses and spills
a rustic and silly woman. If they become widows, which can happen, and
with the position you improve as a consort, do not take it as such, that it serves as
hook and fishing rod, and I do not want from your chapel, because in
Truthfully, I tell you that of everything that the judge's wife receives, she must
give an account to the husband in the universal residence, where he will pay with the four
both in death the games that he had not taken over in the
life. Never be guided by the law of lace, which usually has a lot of room
with the ignorant who boast of treble. Find in you more compassion
tears of the poor, but no more justice, than the information of the rich.
Seek to discover the truth among the promises and gifts of the rich, such as
amid the sobs and importunities of the poor. When I can and should
fairness take place, do not burden the offender with the full rigor of the law,
that the fame of the rigorous judge is no better than that of the compassionate. If anything
bend the rod of justice, not with the weight of the gift, but with
that of mercy. When it happens to you to judge a lawsuit of some of you
enemy, turn away the minds of your injury and put them in the truth of the case.
Do not be blinded by your own passion in another's cause, that the errors that in it
you do, the most times, they will be without remedy; and if they have him, it will be at the cost
of your credit, and even of your finances. If some beautiful woman came to
ask you for justice, take your eyes off her tears and your ears from her
groans, and consider space the substance of what he asks, if you do not want
May your reason be drowned in her tears and your goodness in her sighs. To which you have
to punish with works do not treat badly with words, because it is enough for the
unfortunate the pain of the torture, without the addition of bad reasons. To the
guilty that I fall under your jurisdiction, consider him a miserable man,
subject to the conditions of our depraved nature, and in all
whatever will be on your part, without hurting the other side, show him
pious and gracious, because, although the attributes of God are all equal,
More resplendent and reigns in our view that of mercy than that of
Justice. If you follow these precepts and these rules, Sancho, they will be long
your days, your fame will be eternal, your awards heaped, your happiness
unspeakable, you will marry your children as you want, titles will have them and your
grandchildren, you will live in peace and the approval of the people, and in the last steps
of life will reach you that of death, in soft and mature old age, and
the tender and delicate hands of your third netezuelos will close your eyes.
What I have told you so far are documents that have to adorn your soul;
listen now to those that are to serve as adornment of the body.
Chapter XLIII. On the second advice that Don Quixote gave to Sancho Panza
Who would hear the past reasoning of Don Quixote who did not consider him
very sane and better intentioned person? But, as many times in the
progress of this great story is said, he only shot in
playing him in the cavalry, and in the other speeches he showed to be clear and
lighthearted understanding, so that at every step they discredited their
his judgment works, and his judgment his works; but in this two seconds
documents that he gave to Sancho, showed great grace, and put his
discretion and his madness in a raised point.
Sancho listened to him very attentively, and tried to keep in memory
his advice, like who thought to keep them and leave for them in good labor
of the pregnancy of his government. Don Quixote then continued and said:
-With regard to how you have to govern your person and house, Sancho,
The first thing I charge you is to be clean, and to cut your nails, without
let them grow, as some do, whom their ignorance has given to
understand that long nails beautify their hands, as if that
excrement and additive that are stopped cutting off the nail, being before
Kestrel claws lizard: pig and extraordinary abuse. Do not walk,
Sancho, downcast and lazy, that the broken dress gives signs of encouragement
dismembered, if the decomposition and slackness does not fall below
sarcasm, as judged in that of Julius Caesar. Take discretely the
pulse to what your trade can be worth, and if it suffers, let your
servants, give it honest and profitable rather than showy and bizarre, and distribute it
between your servants and the poor: I mean that if you have to wear six
pages, you saw three and three other poor, and thus you will have pages for heaven and
for the ground; and this new way of giving livery is not reached by
boastful. Do not eat garlic or onions, because they do not get your smell
villainy. Go slowly; speaks quietly, but not in a way that appears
that you listen to yourself, that all affectation is bad. Eat little and dinner
More little, that the health of the whole body is forged in the office of the
stomach. Be temperate in your drinking, considering that too much wine or
keep a secret or keep a word. Take note, Sancho, not to chew two
cheeks, or burping in front of anyone.
"I don't understand burping," said Sancho.
And Don Quixote said to him:
-Erutar, Sancho, means regoldar, and this is one of the most clumsy
words that the Castilian language has, although it is very meaningful; and so,
curious people have embraced Latin, and when re-welding it says to burp, and to
regüeldos, erutaciones; and, when some do not understand these terms,
matters little, that use will introduce them over time, that with
easily understand each other; and this is to enrich the language, about who has
power the vulgar and use.
`` In truth, sir, '' said Sancho, `` that one of the tips and advice that
I think to carry in the memory it has to be the one not to regolder, because I usually
do very often.
"Erutar, Sancho, not regoldar," said Don Quixote.
`` Erutar, I'll say from here on, '' answered Sancho, `` because I don't know
forgot.
-Also, Sancho, you must not mix the crowd of
sayings that you usually; that, since the sayings are short sentences,
many times you wear them so much by the hair, that they seem more absurd than
sentences.
`` God can remedy that, '' answered Sancho, `` because I know more proverbs than
a book, and so many come to my mouth when I speak, that they quarrel over
go out with each other, but the tongue is throwing the first ones
find, even if they do not come bareback. But I will have an account from now on
to say those that suit the gravity of my position, that in a full house
dinner is cooked soon, and whoever shuffles does not shuffle, and safely is the
that rings, and giving and having brains has been necessary.
"Yes, Sancho!" said Don Quixote, "fit in, string in, string together sayings,
that nobody is going to hand you! Punish me my mother, and I blow them away! I'm
saying that excuses sayings, and in an instant you have thrown here a litany
dellos, which thus fits with what we are dealing with as for the hills of
Úbeda. Look, Sancho, I am not telling you that a saying brought to
purpose, but loading and stringing sayings a lot moche makes the talk
passed out and down. When you go up on horseback, do not go throwing the body
on the last saddle, nor carry your legs stiff and thrown and deviated
from the horse's belly, nor do you go so lazy that it seems that you are going
on the roe deer: that riding a horse makes some gentlemen; to others,
stables. Let your sleep be moderate, that the one who does not get up early with the sun, does not
enjoy the day; and warns, oh Sancho !, that diligence is the mother of
good fortune, and laziness, its opposite, never reached the term it demands
a good wish. This last piece of advice that I want to give you now, since I don't
serve to adorn the body, I want you to carry it very much in your memory, that
I believe that it will not be of less benefit to you than what I have given you up to now; and
is that you never start to dispute lineages, at least, comparing them
with each other, then, by force, in which they are compared one has to be the best,
and of whom you destroy you will be hated, and of whom you raise up in no way
way awarded. Your dress will be full-length, long robe, a blacksmith
little longer; greguescos, not even think, that they are not well or the
gentlemen or governors. For now, this has been offered to me,
Sancho, what to advise you; time will pass, and, according to the occasions, thus
will be my documents, as you are careful to notify me of the state in which
you find yourself.
`` Sir, '' answered Sancho, `` I well see that all that your grace has
said they are good things, holy and profitable, but what use are they to be
if I do not remember any? It is true that that of not letting me grow
nails and to marry again, if it is offered, I will not miss the magic,
but it is other bad guys and tangles and scraps, I don't even remember
remember more of them than of the clouds of old, and thus, it will be necessary to
give me in writing, that, since I can't read or write, I'll give it to you
to my confessor so that I can fit them and reconsider when necessary.
`` Ah, my sinner, '' replied Don Quixote, `` and how bad it seems in the
governors not knowing how to read or write !; because you have to know, oh
Sancho !, that a man cannot read, or be left-handed, argues one of two things:
or that he was the son of parents who were too humble and low, or he was so naughty
and bad that it could not enter into good use or good doctrine. Great lack
It is the one you carry with you, and thus, I would like you to learn to even sign.
`` I know how to sign my name well, '' answered Sancho, `` that when I was a prioste in my
Instead, I learned to make bale-like letters that said that
it said my name; how much more, that I will pretend that I have a crippled right hand,
and I'll have another sign for me; that there is a remedy for everything, if not for the
death; and, having the command and the stick, I will do what I want; how much
more, than the one that has the mayor father ... And, being I governor, that is
more than being mayor, come, let her see! No, but popen and
heat me up, you will come for wool and will come back shorn; and to whom God
he loves well, the house knows him; and the follies of the rich by sentences pass
in the world; and, being myself, being governor and jointly liberal, as
I think I am, there will be no need to resemble me. No, but make yourselves honey, and
paparos have flies; as much as you have worth, said one my spirit, and
rooted man you will not be avenged.
"Oh, damn you from God, Sancho!" Don Quixote said at this time.
Sixty thousand satanases take you and your sayings! An hour ago
you're skewering and giving me gulps of torment with each one. I assure you
that these sayings will one day lead you to the gallows; for them they have to
remove your vassals from the government, or there must be communities among them.
Tell me, where do you find them, ignorant, or how do you apply them, fool, that for
Do I say one and apply it well, do I sweat and work as if I were digging?
"By God, lord our master," replied Sancho, "your grace is complaining about
well few things. What the hell does it rot that I use my
hacienda, which I have no other, or any other wealth, but sayings and
more sayings? And now I am offered four who came here pictured, or
like pears in tobacco, but I will not say them, because to the good silence they call
Sancho.
"That Sancho is not you," said Don Quixote, "because not only are you not good
to be silent, but to speak badly and persist badly; and, with all that, I would like to know what
four sayings now occurred to your memory that came here on purpose,
that I am going through mine, that I have it good, and none is offered to me.
"What better," said Sancho, "that" between two wisdom teeth you never put your
thumbs ", and" to leave my house and what do you want with my wife, there is no
answer ", and" if you hit the pitcher on the stone or the stone on the pitcher, wrong
for the pitcher, "all of which come bareback? Let no one take his
governor or the one who commands him, because he will get hurt, like the one who
puts the finger between two wisdom teeth, and although they are not wisdom teeth, as
be molars, it does not matter; and what the governor says there is no
reply, as in "get out of my house and what do you want with my wife." Because it
of the stone in the pitcher a blind man will see it. So, it is necessary that the
Let him see the speck in another's eye, see the beam in his, because it is not said
for him: "the dead woman with her throat was shocked," and your grace knows well
What more does a fool know in his house than a sane man in someone else's.
`` Not that, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that the fool in his house or in the
someone else knows nothing, because on the increase of folly does not settle
no discreet building. And let's leave this here, Sancho, what if wrong
you rule, yours will be the fault, and mine the shame; more comfort to me than I have
done what I should in advising you with the truth and with the discretion to me
possible: with this I leave my obligation and my promise. God guide you
Sancho, and govern you in your government, and remove me from the scruples that
It remains that you have to find the entire island upside down, which I could
excuse yourself with discovering the duke who you are, telling him that all that fat
and that little person you have is nothing more than a sack full of sayings
and of malice.
"Sir," replied Sancho, "if it seems to your mercy that I am not pro
for this government, from here I release, what else do I want a single black from
the nail of my soul that to my whole body; and so I will sustain myself Sancho to dry
with bread and onion, as governor with partridges and capons; and more than,
while sleeping, they are all the same, the great and the young, the
poor and rich; and if your grace looks into it, you will see that only your
mercy has put me in this to govern: that I do not know more about governments of
insulas than a vulture; And if you imagine that for being governor you have to
take the devil, more I want to go Sancho to heaven than governor to the
hell.
"By God, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "for these last reasons alone
what you have said, I judge that you deserve to be governor of a thousand islands: good
natural you have, without which there is no science that is worth; entrust yourself to God,
and try not to err in the first intention; I mean you always have
I try and firmly resolve to succeed in any business that occurs to you,
because heaven always favors good wishes. And let's go eat, what
I think these gentlemen are already waiting for us.
Chapter XLIV. How Sancho Panza was taken to the government, and from the stranger
adventure that happened to Don Quixote in the castle
They say that in the original story itself it is read that, arriving Cide
Hamete to write this chapter, his interpreter did not translate as he did.
had written, that it was a mode of complaint that the Moor had of himself, for
having taken up a story as dry and limited as this of
Don Quixote, because it seemed to him that he always spoke of him and Sancho, without
dare to extend to other digressions and episodes more serious and more
entertaining; and said that always going with the understanding, the hand and
the pen to write of a single subject and speak through the mouths of few
people was an unbearable job, the fruit of which did not redound to their
author, and that, to avoid this inconvenience, he had used in the first part
of the artifice of some novels, such as that of the impertinent curious and
that of the captive Captain, who are as separate from history, since
the others that are recounted there are cases that happened to Don Quixote himself, who
they couldn't stop writing. He also thought, as he says, that many,
taken away from the attention demanded by don Quixote's exploits, they would not
to novels, and they would go through them, either in haste or in anger, without
notice the gala and artifice that they contain, which will be shown well
exposed when, by themselves, without getting close to the follies of Don
Quixote or Sancho's nonsense came to light. And so, in this second
part did not want to ingest single or catchy novels, but some episodes
that they seemed it, born of the same events that the truth offers; and
even these, limitedly and with only the words that are enough to
declare them; and, since it is contained and closed in the narrow limits of the
narration, having skill, sufficiency and understanding to deal with the
universe all, asks not to despise his work, and praise him, not
for what he writes, but for what he has stopped writing.
And then the story continues saying that, in finishing eating don
Quixote, the day he gave the advice to Sancho, that afternoon he gave it to him
written, so that he could find someone to read them; but, there were hardly any
given, when they fell and came at the hands of the Duke, who communicated them
with the duchess, and the two marveled again at the madness and wit
of Don Quixote; and thus, carrying on their mockery, that afternoon they sent
to Sancho with much accompaniment to the place that for him had to be an island.
It came to pass, then, that the one in charge was a butler of the duke,
very discreet and very funny - that there can be no grace where there is no
discretion - which the person of Countess Trifaldi had done, with the
grace that is referred to; and with this, and with being industrious of his
gentlemen of how he had to have with Sancho, came out with his intent
wonderfully. I say, then, that it happened that, just as Sancho saw such a
butler, his face appeared to be the same as Trifaldi, and,
turning to his lord, he said:
-Sir, or the devil has to take me from here to where I am, in just
and in believer, or your grace has to confess to me that the face shows
The duke's butler, who is here, is the same as Sorrowful.
Don Quixote looked attentively at the butler, and, having looked at him, said to
Sancho:
-There's no reason for the devil to take you, Sancho, neither in righteous nor in believer,
I don't know what you mean; that the face of the Sorrowful is that of the
butler, but that is not why the butler is the Sorrowful One; that, to be,
would imply a very large contradiction, and it is not time now to do these
inquiries, which would be entering intricate mazes. Trust me,
friend, that it is necessary to beg Our Lord very truly to deliver us to
both of bad sorcerers and bad charmers.
`` It is not a joke, sir, '' replied Sancho, `` but before I heard you speak, and not
it seemed that the voice of Trifaldi sounded in my ears. However,
I will be silent, but I will not stop being warned from here on, to see if
discover another sign that confirms or dispels my suspicion.
`` You must do so, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` and you will give me notice of everything.
that in this case you discover and of everything that in the government you
it happens.
Finally, Sancho came out, accompanied by many people, dressed in a literary dress, and
over a very wide coat of a tawny water chamelote, with a cap of
the same, on a male to the genet, and behind him, by order of the duke,
The red was wearing jaeces and jumental ornaments of silk and brand-new. I returned to
Sancho head from time to time to look at his ass, with whose company
He was so happy that he did not exchange with the Emperor of Germany.
As he said goodbye to the dukes, he kissed their hands, and took their blessing.
sir, who gave it to him with tears, and Sancho received it with little pouts.
Leave, kind reader, to go in peace and at good time to good Sancho, and wait two
bushels of laughter, which must cause you to know how he behaved in his position, and,
meanwhile, he listens to know what happened to his master that night; yes with
you do not laugh, at least you will spread your lips with a jimia laugh,
because the events of Don Quixote, either have to be celebrated with admiration, or
with laughter.
So let it be said that Sancho had scarcely left when Don Quixote
felt his loneliness; and if it were possible to revoke the commission and remove
the government, did it. The duchess recognized his melancholy, and asked him what
what was he sad about; that if it was due to the absence of Sancho, what squires,
There were mistresses and maids in his house who would serve him very much to the satisfaction of
your wish.
`` It is true, my lady, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that I feel the absence of
Sancho, but that's not the main cause that makes me look like I'm
sad, and, of the many offers that your Excellency makes me,
I only accept and choose that of the will with which they are made to me, and, as far as
Furthermore, I beg Your Excellency that within my room you consent and
let me just be the one to serve me.
`` In truth, '' said the Duchess, `` Mr. Don Quixote, it must not be so: that
Four maidens of mine are to serve him, beautiful as flowers.
`` For me, '' answered Don Quixote, `` they will not be like flowers, but like
thorns that pierce my soul. So they will enter my room, nothing
make it look like it, like flying. If your greatness wants to bring
Go ahead to do me mercy without me deserving it, let me have it
with me, and that I use my inside doors, that I put a wall
in the midst of my desires and my honesty; and I don't want to lose this
custom for the liberality that your highness wants to show me. AND,
In resolution, I will sleep dressed before I allow no one to undress me.
"No more, no more, Senor Don Quixote," replied the Duchess. For me I say that
I will order that not even a fly enter your room, not that a maiden;
I am not a person, that for me the decency of Mr. Don has to be dislodged
Quixote; which, as it has become clear to me, is the one that stands out the most among its many
virtues is that of honesty. Undress your mercy and clothe your
alone and in their own way, as and when they want, that there will be no one to prevent it,
because inside his room he will find the necessary glasses to the need of the one who
sleeps behind closed doors, because no natural necessity compels him to
open it. Long live the great Dulcinea del Toboso for a thousand centuries, and let her name be
spread throughout the roundness of the earth, because he deserved to be loved so
brave and so honest knight, and the benign skies infuse in the
heart of Sancho Panza, our governor, a desire to finish his
disciplines, so that the world can once again enjoy the beauty of such a great
Ms.
To which Don Quixote said:
-Your altitude has spoken as who it is, that in the mouth of the good
Ladies, there must be none that is bad; and more adventurous and better known
It will be in the world Dulcinea for having praised your greatness, that for
all the praises that the most eloquent of the earth can give him.
`` Well done, Senor Don Quixote, '' replied the Duchess, `` dinner time is over.
comes, and the duke must wait: come your mercy and we have supper, and
He will go to bed early, that the trip he made yesterday from Candaya was not so short
that has not caused any grinding.
`` I feel none, madam, '' answered Don Quixote, `` because I will dare to swear to
Your Excellency, in my life I have climbed on a beast more calm or
better step than Clavileño; and I don't know what could have moved Malambruno to
get rid of such a light and gentle horse, and burn it like that, without further ado
no more.
`` You can imagine that, '' replied the Duchess, `` that, repentant of the evil
that he had done to Trifaldi and company, and to other people, and to
evils that as a sorcerer and enchanter he must have committed, he wanted
conclude with all the instruments of his trade, and, as a principal and that
but it brought him restless, wandering from land to land, he burned Clavileño;
that with its scorched ashes and with the trophy of the poster the
value of the great Don Quixote de la Mancha.
Once again, Don Quixote gave the Duchess a new thanks, and at dinner, Don
Quixote retired to his room alone, not allowing anyone to enter with him.
him to serve him: he was so afraid of finding occasions that would move him or
forced to lose the honest decorum that his mistress Dulcinea kept,
always put in the imagination the goodness of Amadís, flower and mirror of the
errant knights. He closed the door behind him, and by the light of two
Wax undressed, and taking off his shoes - oh unworthy of such a person! -
they were released, not sighs, or anything else, that discredited the cleanliness
of his police, but up to two dozen points out of an average, which was
made lattice. The good lord was deeply grieved, and he gave to have
there an adarme of green silk an ounce of silver; I say green silk because
stockings were green.
Here Benengeli exclaimed, and, writing, said '' O poverty, poverty! I dont know
For what reason did that great Cordovan poet move to call you
ungrateful holy gift!
Although I live, I know well, from the communication I have had with Christians,
that holiness consists of charity, humility, fee, obedience and
poverty; but, with all that, I say that it must have a lot of God who knows
come to be content with being poor, if not in that mode of poverty of
who says one of his greatest saints: "Have all things as if they were not
have "; they call this poverty of spirit; but you, second poverty,
that you are the one I speak of, why do you want to crash with the hidalgos
and well born more than with other people? Why do you force them to give
pants to shoes, since the buttons of their clothes some are made of
silk, other bristles, and others glass? Why are their necks, for the greater
part, must they always be escarole, and not open with a mold? '' And in this
it will be seen that the use of starch and collars is ancient
open. And he continued: `` Wretched of the well-born that is giving clues to
his honor, eating badly and behind closed doors, making the toothpick a hypocrite
teeth with which he goes out to the street after not having eaten anything that
force them to be cleaned! Wretched man, I say, who has the honor
frightening, and thinks that from a league the patch of the
the shoe, the hat's sweat, the blue tit's yarn, and the hunger for
his stomach!''
All this was renewed to Don Quixote in the ease of his points, but
He consoled himself with seeing that Sancho had left him some boots on the way,
He thought about putting on another day. Finally, he leaned back thoughtfully and regretfully, like this
of the fault that Sancho made of him as of the inreparable misfortune of his
stockings, who would take the stitches, even if it was with silk of another color, which
It is one of the greatest signs of misery that a gentleman can give in the
speech of its tedious narrowness. He killed the candles; it was hot and I couldn't
to sleep; He got up from his bed and opened a little window of a grill that gave
over a beautiful garden, and when he opened it, he felt and heard that he walked and spoke
people in the garden He began to listen carefully. Those of
down, so much so that he could hear these reasons:
-Don't insist on me, oh Emerencia! Let him sing, because you know that, from the point
that this stranger entered this castle and my eyes looked at him, I don't know
sing, but cry; the more, that the dream of my lady has more than
light than heavy, and I wouldn't want him to find us here for all the treasure
of the world. And, in case he slept and did not wake up, in vain would it be my
I sing if he sleeps and does not wake up to hear this new Aeneas, who has arrived
to my regions to make me mocked.
`` Do not give in to that, Altisidora friend, '' they replied, `` that without a doubt the Duchess and
how many are in that house sleep, if it is not the lord of your heart and the
alarm clock of your soul, because now I felt that I opened the window of the gate
of his stay, and no doubt he must be awake; sing, my hurt,
in a low and soft tone to the sound of your harp, and, when the Duchess sits us down, she will
We will blame it on the heat.
"That is not the point, oh Emerencia!" answered the Altisidora, but in
that I would not want my singing to discover my heart and be judged by
who have no news of the mighty forces of love for maiden
whimsical and light. But come what may, better shame on
face that stains the heart.
And, in this, he felt a harp play very softly. Hearing which, it was don
Quixote was astonished, because at that moment the
infinite adventures similar to that one, of windows, bars and gardens,
musics, compliments and faints that in his faded books
of chivalry had read. Then he imagined that some maid of the duchess
was in love with him, and that honesty forced her to keep her secret
Will; feared he would not surrender, and proposed in his thought not to let himself
overcome; and, entrusting himself with all good spirits and good humor to his mistress
Dulcinea del Toboso, determined to listen to the music; and, to give to
understand that he was there, gave a feigned sneeze, that not a little
the maidens were glad, because they did not want anything else but that Don Quixote
hear. With the harp played and tuned, Altisidora began this
Romance:
-Oh, you, who are in your bed,
between holland sheets,
sleeping straight
From overnight,
knight the bravest
that La Mancha has produced,
more honest and more blessed
than the fine gold of Arabia!
Hear a sad maiden,
well grown and poorly achieved,
that in the light of your two suns
it feels like burning the soul.
You look for your adventures
and strange misfortunes you find;
you give the holidays, and deny
the remedy to heal them.
Tell me, brave young man,
may God prosper your desires,
if you grew up in Libya,
or in the mountains of Jaca;
if serpents gave you milk;
yes, well, it was your mistresses
the roughness of the jungles
and the horror of the mountains.
Very well may Dulcinea,
plump and healthy maiden,
take pride in having surrendered
to a tiger and wild beast.
For this she will be famous
from Henares to Jarama,
from the Tagus to Manzanares,
from Pisuerga to Arlanza.
I'll trade for her
and put on a skirt
of the most gayadas of mine,
that of gold adorn stripes.
Oh, who could be seen in your arms,
or if not, next to your bed,
scratching your head
and killing your dandruff!
I ask a lot, and I am not worthy
of mercy so marked:
the feet I would like to bring you,
that this is enough for a humble woman.
Oh, what caps would I give you,
what silver boots,
what of damask tights,
what about holland blacksmiths!
What very fine pearls,
each like a gill,
that, not having companions,
Solas were called!
Do not look from your tarpeya
this fire that burns me,
Nero from La Mancha of the world,
nor do you fan him with your anger.
I am a girl, a tender pulcela,
my age of fifteen does not pass:
I am fourteen and three months old,
I swear to God and in my soul.
I am not lame, nor am I lame,
nor do I have any handicap;
the hair, like lilies,
that, standing up, dragging along the ground.
And although it is my aquiline mouth
and the nose somewhat flat,
be my topaz teeth
my beauty praises heaven.
My voice, you see, if you listen to me,
that equals the one that is sweeter,
and I am of disposition
something less than median.
These and other thanks of mine,
they are the spoils of your quiver;
this house I am a maiden,
and Altisidora call me.
Here the song of the ill-fated Altisidora ended, and the astonishment of the
required Don Quixote, who, giving a great sigh, said among himself:
-That I must be such a wretched wanderer, that there must be no maid who
look at me that you do not fall in love with me ...! May it have to be so short of luck
the unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso, who should not leave her alone to enjoy the
incomparable firmness of mine ...! What do you want her, queens? What do you chase her
empresses? What are you hounding her for, fourteen to fifteen year old maids?
Leave, leave the wretched woman to triumph, rejoice and rejoice with the fate that
Love wanted to give him my heart and give him my soul. Behold,
caterva in love, that for Dulcinea alone I am of mass and alfenique, and
for all the others I am made of flint; for her I am honey, and for you
acíbar; for me alone Dulcinea is the beautiful, the discreet, the honest, the
the gallant and the well-born, and the others, the ugly, the foolish, the light
and those of the worst lineage; to be his, and not someone else's, he threw the
nature to the world. Cry or sing Altisidora; despair Madama, for
who beat me in the castle of the enchanted Moor, that I have to be
of Dulcinea, cooked or roasted, clean, well raised and honest, despite
all the bewitching powers of the earth.
And, with this, he slammed the window shut, and, spiteful and regretful, as if
some great misfortune had befallen him, he lay down on his bed, where
We will leave you for now, because the great Sancho Panza is calling us, who
wants to start his famous government.
Chapter XLV. How the great Sancho Panza took possession of his island, and
the way he began to rule
O perpetual discoverer of the antipodes, ax of the world, eye of heaven,
sweet shake of the canteens, Timbrio here, Phoebus there, shooter here,
doctor there, father of Poetry, inventor of Music: you who always
You go out, and although it looks like it, you never wear it! I say to you, oh sun, with whose
help man beget man !; I say to you that you favor me, and
Alum the darkness of my wit, so that I can run through its
points in the narration of the government of the great Sancho Panza; that without you, I
I feel lukewarm, emaciated, and confused.
I say, then, that with all his accompaniment Sancho arrived at a place of up to
a thousand neighbors, which was one of the best the duke had. They gave him to understand
which was called the Barataria island, or because the place was called
Baratario, or because of the cheap price that the government had given him. To the
Arriving at the gates of the village, which was surrounded, the regiment of the
people to receive him; the bells rang, and all the neighbors gave
samples of general joy, and with much pomp they brought him to the church
greater to thank God, and then, with some ridiculous ceremonies,
handed over the keys to the town, and admitted him as perpetual governor
of the Barataria island.
The suit, the beard, the fatness and smallness of the new governor had
admired all the people that the busilis in the story did not know, and even all
those who knew, which were many. Finally, in taking him out of the church,
They took him to the courthouse and sat him in it; and the butler
of the duke he said:
-It is an ancient custom in this island, Mr. Governor, that whoever comes to
take possession of this famous island is obliged to answer a question
that it be done, that it be something intricate and difficult, whose response
the people take and touch the pulse of the ingenuity of their new governor; and so, or
he is glad or saddened by his coming.
While the butler was saying this to Sancho, he was looking at some
large and many letters that on the border wall of his chair were
written; and, as he could not read, he asked what those paintings were
that they were on that wall. It was answered:
-Sir, there it is written and noted the day that Your Lordship took
possession of this insula, and the epitaph reads: Today, to so many of that month and
of that year, Mr. Don Sancho Panza took possession of the island,
I enjoyed it for many years.
-And who do they call Don Sancho Panza? asked Sancho.
`` To your honor, '' replied the butler, `` who on this island has not
another belly entered but the one sitting in that chair.
`` Well, brother, '' said Sancho, `` that I have no gift, not even in all my
there has been a lineage: Sancho Panza they called me dry, and Sancho was called my
father, and Sancho my agüelo, and all were Panzas, without added gifts
nor donuts; and I imagine that in this island there must be more gifts than
stones; but enough: God understands me, and it may be that, if the government
lasts four days, I will weed these gifts, which, by the crowd, must
to anger like mosquitoes. Go ahead with your question sir
butler, I will answer the best I know, now sad or not
the people are saddened.
At this moment two men entered the court, one dressed in
the farmer and the other a tailor, because he had scissors in his hand, and the
tailor said:
Governor, I and this peasant man come before your favor in
reason that this good man came to my store yesterday (that I, with pardon of
those present, I am an examined tailor, God be blessed), and, putting
a piece of cloth in his hands, he asked me: `` Sir, would there be in this
enough cloth to make me a hood? '' I, feeling the cloth, replied
Yes; He must have imagined, what I imagine, and I imagined well, that
no doubt I wanted to steal some part of the cloth from him, relying on his
malice and in the bad opinion of the tailors, and told me to see if
there would be for two; guess his thought and say yes; and he, gentleman
in his damaged and first intention, he was adding hoods, and I adding
yeah, until we hit five hoods, and now at this point it's just
come for them: I give them to him, and he does not want to pay me the making, before
ask me to pay or return your cloth.
"Is this all so, brother?" asked Sancho.
`` Yes, sir, '' replied the man, `` but do him your mercy to show
the five hoods he has made for me.
"Willingly," replied the tailor.
And, continually reaching out from under the blue tit, showed in it five
caps put on the five heads of the fingers of the hand, and said:
-Here are the five hoods that this good man asks of me, and in God and in
my conscience that I have nothing left of the cloth, and I will give the work on sight
of overseers of the trade.
Everyone present laughed at the crowd of hoods and the new
lawsuit. Sancho began to consider a little, and said:
-It seems to me that in this lawsuit there should not be long delays, but rather to judge
then in the judgment of a good man; and so, I give by sentence that the tailor
lose the workmanship, and the farmer the cloth, and the hoods are taken to the
prisoners of jail, and there will be no more.
If the last sentence of the farmer's bag moved the admiration of the
Bystanders, it made them laugh; but, in short, what he ordered was done
the governor; Before which two elderly men appeared; the one
He had a cane for a staff, and the one without a staff said:
-Sir, I lent this good man days ago ten gold shields in gold,
for doing him pleasure and good deed, on condition that he return them to me when
asked for it; many days passed without asking him, for not putting him in
greater need to return them to me than he had when I loaned them to him;
but, because it seemed to me that he was neglecting his pay, I have asked him once and for
many times, and not only does he not return them to me, but he denies them and says that
I never lent him such ten escudos, and if I did lend them to him,
he's back. I have no witnesses for the loan or the return, because no
He has returned them to me; I would like your grace to take an oath, and if
I will swear that he has returned them to me, I forgive them here and in front of
God.
"What do you say to this, good old man with the staff?" -said Sancho.
To which the old man said:
"I, sir, confess that he lent them to me, and may your mercy lower that rod;" and,
Well, he leaves it in my oath, I will swear how I have returned and paid them
really and truly.
The governor lowered the staff, and while the old man with the staff gave the staff
to the other old man, to be kept as long as he swore, as if it impregnated him
a lot, and then put his hand on the cross of the staff, saying it was true
that he had been loaned those ten shields that were requested; but what
he had turned them from his hand to hers, and that by not falling for it
he asked again for moments. Seeing which the great governor,
he asked the creditor how he responded to what his opponent said; and said that
without a doubt his debtor must be telling the truth, because he considered him to be a man
of good and good Christian, and that he must have forgotten how
and when had he returned them, and that from then on he would never ask
any. The debtor took up his staff again, and, lowering his head, stepped out of the
court. Seen which Sancho, and that without further ado he left, and seeing
also the plaintiff's patience, bowed his head on his chest, and,
putting the index of the right hand on the eyebrows and noses,
He was thoughtful for a little space, and then he raised his head and sent
to call the old man with the staff, who had already left. Trujéronsele, and,
When Sancho saw him, he said:
"Give me, good man, that staff, which I need."
"Very willingly," replied the old man, "here he is, sir."
And put it in his hand. Sancho took him, and, giving himself to the other old man, said:
-Go with God, you are already paid.
"Me, sir?" replied the old man. Well, is this cane worth ten escudos
of gold?
"Yes," said the governor; or if not, I'm the biggest joint in the world. And now
It will be seen if I have the skills to rule an entire kingdom.
And he commanded that there, in front of everyone, the reed should be broken and opened. Made
thus, and in the heart of it they found ten gold shields. They all stayed
admired, and had their governor for a new Solomon.
They asked him where he had found that in that reed were
those ten shields, and replied that if the old man had seen him give
swore, to his contrary, that staff, while taking the oath, and
swear that he had really and truly given them to her, and that,
swear, he asked for the staff again, it came to his imagination that inside it
there was the payment of what they asked for. From where it could be inferred that those who
govern, even if they are fools, perhaps God directs them in their
trials; and more, that he had heard another case like that from the priest of his
place, and that he had such a great memory that, unless he forgot all that
that he wanted to remember, there was no such memory in the whole island.
Finally, the one old corrido and the other paid, they left, and the
present were amazed, and whoever wrote the words, deeds, and
Sancho's movements could not quite determine if he would have him and put
by fool or by discreet.
Then, when this lawsuit was over, a woman entered the court, holding tightly
of a man dressed as a rich cattleman, who came shouting loudly,
saying:
-Justice, lord governor, justice, and if I do not find it on earth, the
I'll go find the sky! Lord governor of my soul, this bad man has
caught in the middle of the field, and has taken advantage of my body as if
it was a badly washed rag, and, unfortunate me! it has taken what I
had kept it more than twenty-three years ago, defending it from Moors and
Christians, natives and foreigners; and me, it always lasts like a
cork oak, keeping me whole like the gecko in the fire, or like
the wool among the brambles, so that this good man would now come with his
clean hands to grope me.
-Even that remains to be found: if this gallant's hands are clean or not
-said Sancho.
And, turning to the man, he told him what he was saying and was answering
That woman. Who, all disturbed, replied:
-Sirs, I am a poor sow cattle farmer, and this morning I was leaving
From this place of selling, with pardon be said, four pigs, let me
they took from alcabalas and socaliñas little less than what they were worth;
I was going back to my village, I ran into this good mistress on the way, and the devil, who
He spreads everything and cooks everything, he made us yogásemos together; I paid him what
sophisticated, and she, unhappy, took hold of me, and has not left me until
bring me to this position. Says I forced her, and lies, for the oath that
I do or plan to do; and this is the whole truth, without missing meaja.
Then the governor asked him if he had any silver money with him;
he said that he had up to twenty ducats in his bosom, in a leather pouch.
He ordered her to be removed and handed over, as it was, to the complainant;
he did it trembling; the woman took it, and, making a thousand zalemas to all and
praying to God for the life and health of the governor, who thus looked for
the needy orphans and maidens; and with this he left the court,
holding the bag in both hands, though first he looked to see if it was
silver the coin inside.
As soon as he came out, when Sancho told the rancher that he was already skipping the
tears, and eyes and heart went after her bag:
-Good man, go after that woman and take her bag, even if she doesn't want to,
and come back here with her.
And he did not say it foolishly or deaf, because then he left like lightning and went to
what was commanded. Everyone present was suspended, waiting for the
The end of that lawsuit, and from then on the man and woman returned more
grasped and clinging than the first time: she is skirting her up and in the
lap on the bag, and the man struggling to take it off; but it was not
possible, according to the woman defended her, who shouted saying:
-Justice of God and of the world! Look at your grace, Governor, the
little shame and little fear is soulless, that, in the middle of town and
in the middle of the street, he wanted to take away the bag that your grace
he ordered to give me.
-And have you taken it from us? asked the governor.
-How to remove? the woman replied. Before I let myself take the life that
take my bag away. Pretty is the girl! Other cats have to kick me out
beards, don't be unhappy and disgusting! Pliers and hammers, mallets and
chisels will not be enough to remove it from my nails, not even claws of
lions: before the soul of the middle in the middle of the meats!
"She is right," said the man, "and I am given up and without strength,
and I confess that mine are not enough to take it off, and leave it.
Then the governor said to the woman:
-Show up, honored and brave, that bag.
She gave it to him later, and the governor turned it to the man, and said to the
forced and not forced:
-My sister, if the same courage and courage that you have shown to defend
this bag you will show him, and even half less, to defend your
body, the forces of Hercules do not force you. Walk with God, and
a lot of congratulations, and do not stop in all this island nor in six leagues to the
round, under pain of two hundred lashes. Come on then I say, churrillera,
shameless and ambitious!
The woman was frightened and was crestfallen and unhappy, and the governor said
to the man:
-Good man, walk with God to your place with your money, and from here
go ahead, if you don't want to lose him, make sure he doesn't come to you at will
yogar with anyone.
The man thanked him the worst he could, and it was, and the bystanders
were again amazed at the trials and sentences of their new
governor. All of which, noted from his coroner, was later written to the
Duke, who was waiting for him with great desire.
And stay here good Sancho, the rush that his master gives us is great,
overjoyed with Altisidora's music.
Chapter XLVI. From the fearful cow bell and cat that received gift
Quixote in the speech of the loves of the enamored Altisidora
We left the great Don Quixote wrapped in the thoughts that had
caused the music of the enamored maiden Altisidora. Slept with them,
and, as if they were fleas, they did not let him sleep or calm down a point, and
those that were missing from her stockings were gathered to her; but, as the
time, and there is no ravine to stop him, ran caballero in the hours, and
morning came very quickly. Which seen by Don Quixote,
he left the soft feathers, and, not at all lazy, he dressed his jacket
dressed and put on his boots on the way, to cover up the misfortune of his
tights; she threw her scarlet shawl over her and put a
green velvet cap, trimmed with silver handrails; hung up the
tahelí from his shoulders with his good and cutting sword, he grasped a large rosary
that with him I continue to bring, and with great prosopopoeia and swagger
anteroom, where the duke and duchess were already dressed and as
waiting for you; and, when passing by a gallery, they were waiting for him
Altisidora and the other maiden her friend, and, just as Altisidora saw Don
Quixote, pretended to faint, and her friend picked her up in her skirts, and with great
she was going to unzip her chest with alacrity. Don Quixote, who saw him, arriving
to them, he said:
-I know what these accidents come from.
`` I don't know what, '' replied the friend, `` because Altisidora is the most
heal of this whole house, and I have never felt it a woe! how much has
I know her, how badly there are how many knights-errant there are in the world, yes
is that everyone is ungrateful. Go your mercy, Mr. Don Quixote,
that this poor girl will not come to her senses as long as your mercy here
be.
To which Don Quixote replied:
"Do your mercy, ma'am, let a lute be put on my
room, that I will comfort the best that I can to this wounded maiden;
that in love principles, quick disappointments are usually remedies
qualified.
And with this he left, so that he would not be noticed by those who saw him there. I dont know
was well withdrawn, when, coming to her senses the fainted Altisidora, said to
his partner:
-It will be necessary to put the lute on him, which Don Quixote undoubtedly wants
give us music, and it won't be bad, being his.
They then went to give an account to the Duchess of what was happening and of the lute that
asked Don Quixote, and she, exceedingly cheerful, arranged with the Duke and with
her maids to make a mockery of her that was more smiling than harmful, and with
They were very happy to wait for the night, which came as quickly as it had
The day had come, which the dukes spent in tasty talks with Don
Quixote. And the duchess that day really and truly dispatched a page
his, who had made the enchanted figure of Dulcinea in the jungle, Teresa
Panza, with the letter from her husband Sancho Panza, and with the bundle of clothes that
had left to be sent, entrusting him to carry out good
relation of everything that happened with her.
This done, and at eleven o'clock at night, Don Quixote found a
vihuela in his room; He tempered it, opened the gate, and felt that people were walking
in the garden; and, having crossed the frets of the vihuela and tuning it
to the best of his ability, he spat and rolled his chest, and then, with a voice
ronquilla, although intoned, he sang the following romance, which he himself
day had composed:
-Sole the forces of love
drive souls crazy,
taking by instrument
careless idleness.
Usually sewing and styling,
and always being busy,
be an antidote to poison
of loving yearnings.
The collected maidens
who aspire to be married,
honesty is the dowry
and the voice of his praise.
The errant knights,
and those who walk in court,
challenge yourselves with the free ones,
with the honest they marry.
There are loves from the east,
that between guests are treated,
that arrive quickly to the west,
because in splitting they end.
The love just come,
that today arrived and leaves tomorrow,
the images do not leave
well impressed on the soul.
Paint on paint
neither shown nor pointed;
and there is first beauty,
the second does not make a trick.
Dulcinea del Toboso
of the soul on the clean slate
I have painted so
that it is impossible to erase it.
Steadfastness in lovers
is the most precious part,
for whom does love miracles,
and also raises them.
Here came Don Quixote from his song, to whom the Duke and
the Duchess, Altisidora and almost all the people of the castle, when
Suddenly, from above a corridor over Don Quixote's grating
lead was falling, they took down a string with more than a hundred cowbells
seized, and then, after them, they poured out a great sack of cats, which likewise
they had smaller cowbells tied to their tails. The noise of the
cowbells and the mayar of cats, which, although the dukes had been
inventors of mockery, it still startled them; and, fearful, Don Quixote
he was stunned. And as luck would have it, two or three cats entered through the
gate of his room, and, giving from one part to another, it seemed that a region
of devils walked in it. They put out the candles that burned in the room, and
They were looking to escape. The unhooking and ascending of the string of
great cowbells did not stop; most of the castle people, who
I did not know the truth of the case, I was suspended and admired.
Don Quixote rose to his feet, and, putting his hand to his sword, began to pull
stabbing through the fence and saying loudly:
"Out, you evil enchanters!" Out, you scoundrel sorceress, that I am
Don Quixote de la Mancha, against whom your
bad intentions!
And, turning to the cats in the room, he threw many
stabbing; They went to the gate, and that way they left, although one,
looking so harassed by Don Quixote's stabs, he jumped into his face
and seized him by the nose with his nails and teeth, for whose pain he
Quixote began to shout the loudest he could. Hearing which the duke
and the Duchess, and considering what it might be, they very quickly came
to their stay, and, opening with a master key, they saw the poor gentleman
struggling with all his might to rip the cat from his face. They entered
with lights and saw the uneven fight; the duke came to distribute it, and don
Quixote said loudly:
-Don't take anyone from me! Let me hand in hand with this demon, with this
sorcerer, with this enchanter, that I will make him understand of me who
It is Don Quixote de la Mancha!
But the cat, not healing from these threats, growled and squeezed. But, finally,
the duke uprooted him and threw him through the gate.
Don Quixote was riddled with his face and his noses not very healthy, although
jilted because they had not let him end the battle that was so locked
I had with that charming scoundrel. They brought oil from Aparicio, and
Altisidora herself, with her very white hands, put bandages on her
everything hurt; and as he put them on, he said in a low voice:
-All these mischiefs happen to you, inveterate knight, because of sin
of your hardness and stubbornness; and pray to God that Sancho forget you
squire to whip, because it never leaves its charm this so beloved of yours
Dulcinea, neither you enjoy it, nor get to the thalamus with her, at least living
I adore you
To all this, Don Quixote did not answer another word if it was not to give a profound
sighed, and then stretched out on his bed, thanking the dukes for the
mercy, not because he was afraid of that gatesque scoundrel, charming and
bell, but because he had known the good intention with which they had
come to help you. The dukes let him calm down, and left, regretful
of the bad event of the mockery; that they did not believe how heavy and expensive it
that adventure, which cost him five days of
confinement and bed, where another adventure more pleasant than the
past, which his historian does not want to tell now, by going to Sancho
Panza, who was very solicitous and very funny in his government.
Chapter XLVII. Where is continued how Sancho Panza behaved in his
government
The story goes that from the court they took Sancho Panza to a
sumptuous palace, where in a great room was placed a royal and
very clean table; And, just as Sancho entered the room, shawms sounded, and
Four pages came out to give him hand water, which Sancho received with great
gravity.
The music stopped, Sancho sat at the head of the table, because there was no
more of that seat, and no other service in all of it. Stood by his side in
standing a character, who later showed himself to be a doctor, with a whale rod
in the hand. They picked up a delicious white towel with which they were
covered with fruits and a great diversity of dishes of different delicacies; one
who looked like a student gave the blessing, and a page put a randado bibador
to Sancho; another who did the job of maestresala, a plate of fruit arrived
in front of; but, he had hardly eaten a bite, when the one with the rod
playing with her on the plate, they were removed from her with great
haste; but the maestresala came another from another delicacy. I was going to prove him
Sancho; but, before it reached him or liked it, the rod had already
touched on it, and a page lifting it up as swiftly as the fruit.
Seen which by Sancho, he was suspended, and, looking at everyone, asked if
that food was to be eaten as a master's game. To the Which
answered the one with the rod:
-It is not to be eaten, Mr. Governor, but as is custom and custom in the
other islands where there are governors. I, sir, am a doctor, and I am
wage earner in this island to be one of the governors of it, and I look for
his health much more than mine, studying night and day, and
feeling the governor's complexion, to succeed in curing him when
I will fall ill; and the main thing I do is attend their lunches and dinners, and
to let him eat what seems to me to be convenient for him, and to take away what
I imagine that it must hurt and be harmful to the stomach; and so, I sent
remove the fruit plate, as it is too wet, and the fruit plate
I also had another delicacy removed, because it was too hot and
have many species, which increase thirst; and he who drinks a lot kills and
it consumes the humid radical, where life consists.
-That way, that plate of partridges that are roasted there, and, to me
It seems, well seasoned, they won't do me any harm.
To which the doctor replied:
"The governor will not eat those as long as I have life."
-Because? -said Sancho.
And the doctor replied:
-Because our teacher Hippocrates, north and light of medicine, in a
His aphorism says: Omnis saturatio mala, partridges autem pessima. Wants
say: "All boredom is bad, but partridges are very bad."
"If that is so," said Sancho, "see the doctor how many delicacies there are
at this table which one will do me the most good and which one less harm, and let me eat
from him without being beaten; because, for the life of the governor, and so God
let him enjoy, that I'm starving, and deny me food, even if it weighs him
to the doctor and he tells me more, before it will be to take my life than
increase it.
"Your grace is right, Senor Governor," replied the doctor; and so,
It is my opinion that your grace does not eat of those stewed rabbits that
there they are, because it is a tricky delicacy. Of that calf, if it weren't
roasted and in marinade, you could still taste it, but there is no reason.
And Sancho said:
-That great playpen that is going ahead seems to me to be a pot
rotten, that by the diversity of things that in such rotten pots
there is, I will not be able to stop running into one that is to my liking and of benefit.
-Absit! said the doctor. Go away from us so bad thought: no
there is one thing in the world worse maintenance than a rotten pot. There the
rotten pots for canons, or for school rectors, or for
the peasant weddings, and let us free the tables of the governors,
where all beauty and detail must attend; and the reason is because
always and everywhere and whoever's medicines are most valued
simple than the compound ones, because in the simple ones you cannot err and in
the compound ones yes, altering the quantity of the things of which they are
composite; but what I know the governor has to eat now,
to preserve your health and verify it, it is a hundred
supplications and a few subtle slices of quince paste, which
they settle the stomach and aid digestion.
Hearing this, Sancho leaned over the back of the chair and stared
in milestone to that doctor, and in a deep voice asked him what his name was and where
I had studied. To which he replied:
-I, Mr. Governor, my name is Dr. Pedro Recio de Agüero, and I am
a place called Tirteafuera, which is between Caracuel and
Almodóvar del Campo, on the right hand side, and I have a doctorate degree from the
University of Osuna.
To which Sancho responded, all on fire:
-Well, Mr. Doctor Pedro Recio de Mal Agüero, a native of Tirteafuera,
place that is on the right hand as we go from Caracuel to Almodóvar del
Campo, graduated from Osuna, take me off later, if not, I vote in the sun that
take a club and that with clubs, starting with him, I should not
throughout the island, at least those that I understand to be
ignorant; that I will put the wise, prudent and discreet doctors
above my head and I will honor them as divine persons. And I say again that
leave me, Pedro Recio, from here; If not, I'll take this chair where I am
sit down and crash it on your head; and ask me in residence, that I
I will unburden myself with saying that I did service to God in killing a bad doctor,
executioner of the republic. And feed me, or else take your government,
that job that does not feed its owner is not worth two beans.
The doctor was excited, seeing the governor so angry, and he wanted to
outside the room, but at that moment a bugle sounded.
post in the street, and, leaning the maestresala out of the window, returned
saying:
-Mail comes from the Duke my lord; some office must bring
importance.
The mail came in sweating and scared, and, taking a sheet from his bosom, put it
in the hands of the governor, and Sancho put him in those of the mayordomo,
He ordered the superscript read, which read as follows: To Don Sancho Panza, Governor
of the Barataria island, in his own hand or in those of his secretary. Hearing
which, Sancho said:
-Who is my secretary here?
And one of those present answered:
- I, sir, because I know how to read and write, and I'm from Biscay.
"With that addition," said Sancho, "you may well be secretary of the same
emperor. Open that sheet, and see what it says.
The newborn secretary did so, and, having read what it said,
He said it was business to treat him alone. Sancho ordered to clear the room,
and that only the butler and the steward remained in it, and the others and
the doctor left; and then the secretary read the letter, which read like this:
It has come to my news, Mr. Don Sancho Panza, that some enemies of mine and
They have to give her a furious assault, I don't know what night; it agrees
watch and be alert, because they do not take you unnoticed. I know also, by
real spies, who have entered that place four people disguised
to take your life, because they fear your ingenuity; open your eye, and
look who comes to speak to you, and do not eat anything that is presented to you. Me
I will take care of helpers if you see yourselves at work, and in everything you will do
as expected from your understanding. From this place, on August 16, at
four o'clock.
Your friend,
The Duke.
Sancho was astonished, and the bystanders showed that they were also astonished; and,
turning to the butler, he said:
-What now has to be done, and has to be later, is to put the
doctor Recio; because if anyone is to kill me, it must be him, and of death
dodgy and lousy, as is the hunger.
`` Also, '' said the headmaster, `` it seems to me that your grace does not eat
everything that is on this table, because some nuns have presented it, and,
as they say, behind the cross is the devil.
"I do not deny it," replied Sancho, "and for now give me a piece of bread and work
of four pounds of grapes, that in them will not be able to come poison; because in
Indeed, I cannot go without eating, and if we are to be ready to
these battles that threaten us, it will be necessary to be well maintained,
because guts carry heart, not heart guts. And you, secretary,
respond to the duke my lord and tell him that what he commands will be fulfilled as
command, without missing a point; and you will give a hand kiss to my lady
Duchess, and I beg you not to forget to send my letter with your own
and my trouble to my wife Teresa Panza, who in this I will receive a lot of grace, and
I will be careful to serve her with all my strength will reach; and of
way you can fit a hand kiss to my lord Don Quixote de la Mancha,
because see that I am grateful bread; and you, as a good secretary and as a good
Biscayan, you can add everything you want and more will come to mind. AND
Raise these tablecloths, and give me something to eat, that I will settle with
how many spies and killers and charmers will come on me and on me
insula.
At this a page entered, and said:
-Here is a business farmer who wants to speak to Your Honor in a
business, he says, of great importance.
"This is a strange case," said Sancho, these merchants. It is possible that
be so foolish, that they do not see that such hours as these are not
in which they have to come to negotiate? By chance those of us who govern, the
that we are judges, we are not men of flesh and blood, and that it is necessary
that they let us rest the time that the need asks, but they want
that we are made of marble stone? By God and in my conscience that if I
the government lasts (which will not last, as it transpires to me), which I put in
waistband to more than one merchant. Agora tell that good man to come in;
but first warn him not to be one of the spies, or my killer.
`` No, sir, '' replied the page, `` because it looks like a pitcher's soul, and I know
little, or he is as good as good bread.
"There is no need to fear," said the butler, "that we are all here."
"Would it be possible," said Sancho, "maestresala, now that the
Dr. Pedro Recio, that I eat something of weight and substance,
even a piece of bread and an onion?
-Tonight, at dinner, the lack of food will be satisfied, and there will be
Your Lordship satisfied and paid, ”said the steward.
"God do it," answered Sancho.
And, in this, entered the farmer, who was of very good appearance, and of a thousand
leagues were seen to be good and good soul. The first thing he said
it was:
-Who is the governor here?
`` Who is it to be, '' replied the secretary, `` but the one who is sitting on the
chair?
"Humble me, then, in your presence," said the farmer.
And, getting on his knees, he asked her hand to kiss it. Denied it
Sancho, and ordered him to get up and say what he wanted. Did so the
farmer, and then he said:
-I, sir, I am a farmer, a native of Miguel Turra, a place that is two
leagues from Ciudad Real.
-We have another Tirteafuera! Sancho said. Say, brother, that what I
I know how to say is that I know Miguel Turra very well, and that he is not very far from me
village.
`` It is, then, the case, sir, '' continued the farmer, `` that I, by the
mercy of God, I am married in peace and in the beam of the Holy Church
Roman catholic; I have two student children that the youngest studies for
bachelor and major for graduate; I am a widower, because my wife died,
Or, to put it better, I was killed by a bad doctor, who purged her while pregnant,
and if God were served that birth would come to light, and be a son, I would
put him to study for a doctor, because he would not have invidious his brothers
bachelor and graduate.
"So," said Sancho, "if your wife had not died, or
they would have died, you were not a widower.
"No, sir, not at all," replied the farmer.
-We are medrados! Sancho replied. Go ahead, brother, it's time to
sleep rather than negotiate.
`` I say, then, '' said the farmer, `` that this my son, who must be a bachelor, is
fell in love in the same town with a maiden named Clara Perlerina, daughter of
Andrés Perlerino, a very rich farmer; and this name of Perlerines does not
comes of ancestry or other lineage, but because all of this lineage are
pearlático, and to improve the name they call them Perlerines; although, if it goes
tell the truth, the maiden is like an oriental pearl, and, looked at by the
right side, it looks like a field flower; not so much on the left, because
He is missing that eye, which has popped out with smallpox; and, although the holes in the
face are many and great, say those who love her well that those do not
they are holes, but graves where the souls of their lovers are buried. It is
so clean that, in order not to dirty the face, it brings the noses, as they say,
rolled up, which only seems to be fleeing from the mouth; and, with everything
This seems fine in the extreme, because he has a big mouth, and, if not
missing ten or twelve teeth and molars, he could pass and scratch between the
more well formed. I don't have to say about the lips, because they are so subtle
and delicate that, if lipstick were used, could make them a
skein; but, since they have a different color from the one used on the lips
commonly, they appear miraculous, because they are mottled blue and green and
bee-planted; and forgive me the governor if I go so often
painting the parts of the one who finally has to be my daughter, who
I want it good and it doesn't seem bad to me.
`` Paint what you want, '' said Sancho, `` I'll be recreating myself in
painting, and if I had eaten, there would be no better dessert for me than yours
portrait.
`` That is what I have to serve, '' replied the farmer, `` but the time will come when
let us be, if we are not now. And I say sir if I could paint your
gentleness and the height of his body, was a matter of admiration; but he can not
be, because she is burdened and hunched over, and her knees are bumpy.
his mouth, and, with all that, it is good to see that if he could get up,
hit the ceiling with his head; and by now she would have given her wife's hand
my bachelor, but cannot extend it, it is added; and, with everything,
her long, ribbed nails show her goodness and good workmanship.
"Okay," said Sancho, "and do account, brother, that you have already painted it
From the feet to the head. What do you want now? And come to the point without
detours or alleys, or scraps or additions.
`` Sir, I would like, '' replied the farmer, `` that your grace would do me
mercy of giving me a letter of favor for my father-in-law, begging him to be
served that this marriage is made, because we are not unequal in the
goods of fortune, nor in those of nature; because, to say the
Truth, Mr. Governor, my son is demonized, and there is not a day that three or
four times do not torment him evil spirits; and having fallen one
Once in the fire, his face is wrinkled like parchment, and his eyes are somewhat
watery and springs; but it has a condition of an angel, and if it is not
Who beat himself and hand himself handfuls, he was a blessed one.
"Do you want something else, good man?" Sancho replied.
"I would like something else," said the farmer, "but I dare not say it;
but boy, well, I must not rot in the chest, hit or not
paste. I say, sir, that I would like your grace to give me three hundred or
six hundred ducats to aid my bachelor's dowry; I say for help
to put up their house, because, in short, they have to live by themselves, without being subject to
the impertinences of the in-laws.
`` See if you want something else, '' said Sancho, `` and don't stop saying it for
embarrassment or embarrassment.
"No, by the way," replied the farmer.
And as soon as he said this, when, rising to his feet, the governor took hold of the
chair he was sitting on and said:
-I vote for such, don rustic and badly regarded jerk, that if you do not turn away and
you hide after my presence, that with this chair I break you and open the
head! Hideputa rogue, painter of the devil himself, are you already at this hour?
Are you coming to ask me for six hundred ducats? And where do I have them, stinking ?; and
Why should he give them to you, even if he had them, sly and foolish ?; and
What is given to me of Miguel Turra, nor of the entire lineage of the Perlerines?
It's about me, I say; if not, for the life of the duke my lord, let him do what I have
saying! You must not be from Miguel Turra, but some sly one who, to
tempt me, hell has sent you here. Tell me, soulless, there is still no day and
I mean I have the government, and do you want me to have six hundred ducats?
The headmaster waved to the farmer to leave the room, who
He did it crestfallen and, apparently, afraid that the governor would not execute
his anger, that the rogue knew how to do his job very well.
But let us leave Sancho with his anger, and leave peace in the circle, and
let us return to Don Quixote, we left his face bandaged and cured of the
gatescas wounds, of which he did not heal in eight days, in one of which
what happened to him that Cide Hamete promises to have punctuality and
truth that usually tells the things of this story, however minimal.
Chapter XLVIII. Of what happened to Don Quixote with Dona Rodríguez, the
mistress of the duchess, with other events worthy of writing and
eternal memory
In addition, the ill-fated Don Quixote was sullen and sullen,
face and pointed, not by the hand of God, but by the claws of a cat,
misfortunes attached to the errant cavalry. Six days he did not go out in
public, on a night of which, being awake and awake,
Thinking of his misfortunes and the pursuit of Altisidora, he felt that
with a key they opened the door of his chamber, and then he imagined that the
loving maiden came to shock his honesty and put him in
condition of missing the fee that he owed to his mistress Dulcinea of ​​the
Toboso.
"No," he said, believing his imagination, and this, in a voice that could be heard;
The greatest beauty of the earth must not be part of it for me to stop
adore the one that I have engraved and stamped in the middle of my heart and in
more hidden in my entrails, now you are, my lady, transformed into
labrador onion, now as a nymph of the golden Tagus, weaving cloth of gold and
Sirgo composed, now Merlin has you, or Montesinos, wherever they want;
that wherever you are mine, and wherever I have been, and must be yours.
Finishing these reasons and opening the door were all one. Stood up
on the bed, wrapped up and down in a yellow satin coverlet, a
galocha on the head, and the face and mustaches bandaged: the face, for
the aruños; the whiskers, because they did not faint and fall; in which
suit looked like the most extraordinary ghost you could think of.
He stared at the door, and when he expected to see the
exhausted and hurt Altisidora, saw a most reverend owner enter with
some repulsed and long white headdresses, so much so that they covered and blanketed her
from head to toe. Between the fingers of his left hand he held a
half a candle lit, and with the right one was shading, because it did not give
the light in the eyes, who were covered by very great cravings. I was stepping on
He was quiet, and his feet moved softly.
Don Quixote looked at her from his watchtower, and when he saw her adeliño and noticed her
silence, he thought that some witch or magician came in that suit to make him
some mischief, and he began to cross himself with great haste. Was
the vision coming, and when he reached the middle of the room, he looked up
and he saw the haste with which Don Quixote was making crosses; what about if He
was scared to see such a figure, she was scared to see hers,
because, just as she saw him so tall and so yellow, with the bedspread and
bandages, which disfigured him, gave a great voice, saying:
-Jesus! What do I see?
And with the start the candle fell from his hands; and, looking dark,
she turned her back to go, and in fear she stumbled on her skirts and gave
I get a big drop. Don Quixote, fearful, began to say:
-Conjure you, ghost, or what you are, that you tell me who you are, and that
Say what you want from me If you are a lost soul, tell me that I
I will do for you everything that my strength will reach, because I am a Catholic
Christian and friend of doing good to everyone; that for this I took the
order of the knight-errant that I profess, whose exercise even until
well to the souls of purgatory it stretches.
The misty owner, who heard the conspiracy, for her fear joined that of Don
Quixote, and with a low and afflicted voice answered him:
-Mr. Don Quixote, if perhaps your grace is Don Quixote, I am not
I am a ghost, nor vision, nor soul of purgatory, as your grace must of
have thought, if not Dona Rodríguez, the mistress of honor of my wife,
Duchess, who, with a need of those that your grace usually
remedy, at your mercy I come.
`` Tell me, Senora Dona Rodríguez, '' said Don Quixote, `` are you
your mercy to do some third party? Because I let him know that I'm not from
profit for no one, thanks to the unparalleled beauty of my lady Dulcinea of ​​the
Toboso. I say, finally, Mrs.Rodriguez, that, as your mercy save
and put aside all love messages, you can relight your candle, and
Come back, and we will depart from everything that I will send the most and most in liking you
come, saving, as I say, all inciting gingerbread.
"Did I get a message from anyone, my lord?" the owner replied. Badly knows me
Your Grace; yes, I am not yet of such a long age to welcome me to
such trifles, then, praised God, my soul is in the flesh, and
all my teeth and molars in my mouth, as well as a few that have
usurped some colds, which in this land of Aragon are so ordinary.
But wait for me your grace a little; I will go out to light my candle, and I will return
in an instant to count my troubles, as a remedy for all
world.
And, without waiting for an answer, he left the room, where Don Quixote stayed.
calm and thoughtful waiting for her; but then a thousand came over him
thoughts about this new adventure, and it seemed to him to be badly done and
worse thought to put himself in danger of breaking his mistress's promised fee, and
said to himself:
-Who knows if the devil, who is subtle and cunning, will want to deceive me now?
with a mistress, what he has not been able to with empresses, queens, duchesses,
marquesas or countesses? That I have heard many times and many
discreet that, if he can, he will give you a blunt rather than an aquiline. And who
know if this loneliness, this occasion and this silence will awaken my desires
who sleep, and will make that after my years I come to fall where I have never
stumbled? And, in such cases, it is better to flee than to wait for battle.
But I must not be in my judgment, because such nonsense I say and think;
that it is not possible that a toquiblanca, long and whimsical owner can move
nor raise lustful thoughts in the most heartless chest in the world. By
Is there any owner on earth who has good meat? Is there
mistress in the world to stop being impertinent, frowning and finicky?
Out, then, mistress, useless for any human gift! Oh,
how well did that lady who is said to have had two owners of
lump with his cravings and pads at the end of his dais, like that
were working, and they served as much for the authority of the room those
statues like the real owners!
And, saying this, he threw himself out of bed, with the intention of closing the door and
not letting Mrs. Rodríguez enter; more, when it came to close, and the
Mrs. Rodríguez returned, lit a white wax candle, and when she
He saw Don Quixote from closer, wrapped in the bedspread, with the bandages,
galocha or becoquín, he feared again, and, retreating back about two steps,
said:
"Are we sure, sir?" Because I don't have a very honest sign
having risen from your bed.
"That is the same good for me to ask, madam," replied Don Quixote; and so,
I wonder if I am safe from being attacked and forced.
"From whom or from whom are you asking, sir, that security?" -answered the
owner.
`` I ask of you and of you, '' replied Don Quixote, `` because not even I am made of marble.
Neither you of bronze, nor is it now ten o'clock in the day, but midnight, and even a
little more, as I imagine, and in a more closed and secret room than
It must have been the cave where the traitorous and daring Aeneas enjoyed the beautiful and
pious Dido. But give me, lady, your hand, I don't want any other security
greater than that of my continence and modesty, and that offered by those
Most reverend you touch.
And, saying this, he kissed her right hand, and seized hers, that she
He found the same ceremonies.
Here Cide Hamete makes a parenthesis, and says that for Muhammad who gave, for
to see the two go thus seized and locked from the door to the bed, the best
Almalafa of two that he had.
Finally, Don Quixote entered his bed, and Dona Rodríguez remained seated
in a chair, slightly off the bed, not taking away the cravings or the
candle. Don Quixote curled up and covered everything, leaving no more than his face
discovered; and, the two having calmed down, the first who broke the
silence was Don Quixote, saying:
-May your mercy now, my lady, doña Rodríguez, undo and unravel
everything that he has inside his careful heart and hurt insides,
who will be heard from me with chaste ears, and helped with pious works.
-I think so, -answered the owner-, that of the gentle and pleasant
The presence of your grace could not be expected but such a Christian response.
«It is, then, the case, Mr. Don Quixote, that, although your grace sees me
sitting in this chair and in the middle of the kingdom of Aragon, and in the habit of
owner annihilated and sanitized, I am a native of Asturias de Oviedo, and of
lineage crossed by many of the best of that province;
but my short luck and the carelessness of my parents, who were impoverished before
of time, without knowing how or how not, they took me to court, to Madrid,
where for the sake of peace and to excuse further misadventures, my parents
they arranged to serve as a working maid to a principal lady; and I want
to know at your mercy that in making vanillas and white labor no
it has put my foot forward in all my life. My parents left me
serving and returned to their land, and within a few years they were due to
go to heaven, because they were also good and Christian Catholics. I stayed
orphan, and attended to the miserable salary and the anguished grants that
such maids are usually given in the palace; and, in this time, without
I gave the opportunity to do so, a home squire fell in love with me, a man already in
days, bearded and personal, and, above all, a nobleman like the king, because he was
Highlander. We did not treat our loves so secretly that they did not come to
news of my lady, who, to excuse you tell and tell, married us in peace
and in beam of the Holy Mother Roman Catholic Church, of whose marriage
a daughter was born to top off my luck, if I had any; no because i
died of childbirth, which I had the right to do and at the right time, but because from there to
My husband died little of a certain fright that he had, that, to have now
place to tell him, I know your grace will be amazed. "
And, in this, he began to cry tenderly, and said:
- Forgive me your grace, Mr. Don Quixote, it is no longer in my power,
because every time I remember my bad achievement, my
eyes of tears. Oh my God, and with what authority did I take my lady to
the haunches of a mighty mule, black as jet! That then
cars or chairs were not used, as they now say they are used, and the ladies
they went to the haunches of their squires. This, at least, I can't stop
tell it, because you can see the upbringing and punctuality of my good husband. "To the
enter from Calle de Santiago, in Madrid, which is somewhat narrow, came to
leave for her a court mayor with two bailiffs in front, and, as well as
my good squire saw him, turned the reins to the mule, giving a sign of
accompany him again. My lady, who went to the haunches, with a low voice
He would say: '' What are you doing, unfortunate? Can't you see I'm going here? '' The mayor,
restrained, he stopped the horse's rein and said: `` -Go on, sir,
your way, that I am the one who must accompany my lady doña
Casilda '', which was the name of my mistress. My husband still insisted, with
cap in hand, to want to go accompanying the mayor, seeing which my
lady, full of rage and anger, pulled out a fat pin, or I think a
punch, from the case, and stuck in the loins, so that my husband gave
a great voice and twisted his body, so that he found his mistress in the
ground. Two of his lackeys came to lift it, and the mayor did the same
and the bailiffs; the Guadalajara Gate was in an uproar, I mean, the people
wasteland that was in it; my mistress came on foot, and my husband came home
of a barber saying that his entrails were passed through.
My husband's courtesy was publicized, so much so that the boys ran at him
the streets, and because of this and because he was somewhat shortsighted, my
Madame the Duchess dismissed him, of whose regret, without a doubt, I have to
me that the evil of death was caused. I was left widowed and helpless, and with
daughter in tow, who was growing in beauty like the foam of the sea.
Finally, as I had a reputation as a great farmer, my lady the Duchess,
who was newly married to the duke my lord, wanted to bring me with him to
this kingdom of Aragon and my daughter neither more nor less, where, going days and
days coming, my daughter grew up, and with her all the grace in the world: she sings
like a calender, dance like thought, dance like a stray, read
and he writes like a schoolmaster, and counts as a miser. From his
cleaning I do not say anything: that the running water is not cleaner, and must
have agora, if I remember correctly, sixteen years, five months and three
days, one more to less. In resolution: with this my girl fell in love a
son of a very rich farmer who is in a village of the duke my lord, not
far away from here. Indeed, I don't know how or how not, they got together, and,
under the word of being her husband, he mocked my daughter, and he does not love her
comply; and, although the duke my lord knows it, because I have complained to him,
not once, but many times, and asked him to order that such farmer marry
my daughter makes merchant ears and hardly wants to hear me; and it is the cause that,
as the father of the trickster is so rich and lends him money, and it comes out for
guarantor of his traps at times, he does not want to displease or give
grief in any way. " I would like, then, my lord, that your mercy
take charge of undoing this grievance, either by pleading, or by arms,
because, according to everyone says, your grace was born in him to undo them and
to straighten the one-eyed and protect the wretched; and put on your
Grace ahead of my daughter's orphanhood, her kindness, her youth, with
all the good parts I've said it has; that in God and in me
conscience that of how many maidens has my lady, that there is none that
reaches the sole of his shoe, and that one they call Altisidora, which is the
that they consider to be more outspoken and gallant, compared to me
daughter, it is not two leagues away. Because I want your mercy to know,
my lord, it is not all gold that glitters; because this Altisidorilla
has more of presumption than of beauty, and more of self-assurance than of
collected, besides that she is not very healthy: that she has a certain tired feeling,
that there is no suffering being with her for a moment. And even my lady the
Duchess ... I want to shut up, it is often said that walls have ears.
"What has my lady the Duchess got for my life, Mrs. Dona Rodriguez?"
asked Don Quixote.
`` With that spell, '' replied the owner, `` I cannot help answering what
I am asked in all truth. Do you see your mercy, Don Quixote, the
beauty of my lady the duchess, that complexion of face, which does not seem
but of a sleek and smooth sword, those two cheeks of milk and
carmine, which has the sun in one and the moon in the other, and that
gallantry with which he treads and even despises the ground, which does not seem
but it is spilling health where does it happen? Well, let your mercy know that
You can thank, first, God, and then, two sources that you have in
two legs, through which all the bad humor of those who say the
doctors that is full.
-Santa Maria! said Don Quixote. And is it possible that my lady the duchess
have such drains? I wouldn't believe it if barefoot friars told me;
But, as Mrs. Doña Rodríguez says so, it must be so. But such
Fountains, and in such places, should not be humorous, but liquid amber.
Truly, now I have just believed that this becoming sources must
be important for health.
Don Quixote had hardly finished saying this reason, when with a great blow
The doors of the room were opened, and from the shock of the blow he fell to
Doña Rodríguez held the candle in her hand, and the room was like a wolf's mouth,
as they say. Then the poor owner felt that they grabbed her by the throat
with two hands, so strongly that they did not let her yelp, and that someone else,
very quickly, without speaking a word, he lifted her skirts, and with one, at the
Apparently, slippery, he began to give him so many spankings that it was compassionate; and,
Although Don Quixote had it for him, he did not wag from his bed, and he did not know what
could be that, and he was still and silent, and even fearing he would not come
for him the batch and whipping spanking. And his fear was not in vain, because, in
leaving the owner ground to the silent executioners (who did not dare
complain), they went to Don Quixote, and, unwrapping the sheet and
the quilt, they pinched him so often and so hard that he could not
to defend themselves in handfuls, and all this in admirable silence. The battle lasted
almost half an hour; the ghosts came out, Dona Rodríguez picked up her
skirts, and, groaning his misfortune, went out the door, without saying
word to Don Quixote, who, painful and pinched, confused and thoughtful,
was left alone, where we will leave him eager to know who had been the
perverse charming that such had put him. But this will be said in due time,
that Sancho Panza calls us, and the good concert of history asks for it.
Chapter XLIX. Of what happened to Sancho Panza around his island
We left the great governor angry and pouting with the painter farmer and
sly, who, industrious of the butler, and the duke's butler,
they made fun of Sancho; but he had them all stiff, you silly maguera,
rough and plump, and he said to those who were with him, and to Dr. Pedro Recio,
that, since the secret of the duke's letter was over, he had re-entered
in the living room:
-Now that I truly understand that judges and governors must
be, or must be, of bronze, so as not to feel the importunities of the
businessmen, who at all times and at all times want to be heard and
dispatch, attending only to your business, whatever may come; what about if He
poor judge does not listen and dispatch, or because he can not or because he is not
that time deputy to give them an audience, then they curse them and
they murmur, and gnaw at their bones, and even demarcate their lineages.
Foolish businessman, foolish businessman, do not rush; wait for seasoning and
juncture to negotiate: do not come at lunchtime or bedtime,
that judges are made of flesh and blood and have to give nature what they
naturally asks them, if it is not me, that I do not feed mine, thank you
to Dr. Pedro Recio Tirteafuera, who is in front, who wants us to
starve, and affirms that this death is life, may God give it to
him and all of his kind: I mean, to that of bad doctors, that of
the good ones, palms and lauros deserve.
Everyone who knew Sancho Panza was amazed, hearing him speak so
elegantly, and did not know what to attribute it to, but rather that the trades and
serious charges, or marinate or hinder understandings. Finally, the
Dr. Pedro Recio Agüero de Tirteafuera promised to give him dinner that
night, even if it exceeded all the aphorisms of Hippocrates. With this
The governor was happy, and he waited with great anxiety for the night to come.
and dinner time; and, although time, apparently his, was running,
without moving from a place, the desired goal was still reached by him, where
They gave him for dinner a salpicón of cow with onion, and cooked hands of
veal something in days. He gave himself in everything with more pleasure than if
They would have given francolines from Milan, pheasants from Rome, veal from Sorrento,
partridges of Morón, or geese of Lavajos; and, between dinner, turning to
doctor, he said:
-Look, Mr. Doctor: from now on do not cure yourself of giving me things to eat
gifts or exquisite delicacies, because it will get my stomach out of its
quicios, which is used to goat, cow, bacon, jerky,
turnips and onions; and, if they give him other delicacies from the palace, the
he receives gingerly, and sometimes with disgust. What the maestresala can
to do is bring me these so-called rotten pots, that the more rotten
they are, they smell better, and in them he can pack and enclose everything that he
I would like, whatever you eat, that I will thank you and I will pay you some
day; and no one makes fun of me, because either we are or we are not: let's all live
and let us eat in good peace company, then, when God dawns, for all
dawns. I will govern this island without forgiving rights or taking bribes, and
everyone bring an alert eye and look for the bolt, because I do
know that the devil is in Cantillana, and that, if they give me the opportunity, they must
see wonders. No, but make yourselves honey, and eat you flies.
"By the way, Senor Governor," said the steward, "that your mercy has
very right in what he has said, and that I offer on behalf of all
insulans of this island who are to serve your mercy with all
punctuality, love and benevolence, because the gentle way of governing that in
these principles your grace has given them no room to do or to think
which is to the detriment of your mercy.
`` I believe it, '' answered Sancho, `` and they would be fools if something else
do or think. And I say again that you take account with my livelihood and
with that of my rucio, which is what matters in this business and does more
case; and, in being time, we are going to hang around, that is my intention to clean this
island of all sorts of filth and lazy people, lazy, and evil
entertaining; because I want you to know, friends, that people waste and
lazy in the republic is the same as drones in hives,
they eat the honey that the hardworking bees make. I plan to favor the
farmers, keep their preeminences to the noblemen, reward the virtuous
and, above all, have respect for religion and the honor of religious.
What do you think of this, friends? Do I say something, or do I screw up my head?
`` Your grace says so much, Senor Governor, '' said the butler, `` that I am
amazed to see that a man as uneducated as your grace, who, at the same time
I think, you don't have any, say so and so many things full of sentences
and warnings, so out of all that from the ingenuity of your mercy
those who sent us and those of us who come here were waiting. Every day they see each other
new things in the world: taunts become real and scoffers
they are mocked.
Night came, and the governor dined, with the permission of Dr. Recio.
Dressed round; He went out with the butler, secretary and steward, and
the coroner who was careful to memorize his deeds, and bailiffs
and scribes, so many that they could form a medium squad. Sancho was going in
middle, with his rod, that there was nothing else to see, and few streets
instead, they felt the noise of stabbing; they went there, and found that they were
two only men who quarreled, who, seeing justice coming,
they stayed; and one of them said:
-Here of God and the king! How and what has to be suffered that they rob in town
in this town, and who comes out to skip in it in the middle of the streets?
`` Calm down, good man, '' said Sancho, `` and tell me what is the cause of this
pendency, that I am the governor.
The other opponent said:
Governor, I will say it very briefly. Your grace will know that
this gentleman has just won now in this gambling house that is here
frontier more than a thousand reales, and God knows how; and, finding myself present,
I judged more than one doubtful luck in his favor, against everything that
conscience dictated; He took the profit, and when he expected me
he had to give some shield, at least, cheap, as is custom and usage
give leading men like me, who are assistants for good and
bad luck, and to support unreason and avoid quarrels, he pocketed his
money and left the house. I came upset after him, and with good and
polite words I have asked you to give me even eight reales, because you know
that I am an honest man and that I have no job or profit, because my
parents did not teach me or let me, and the sly, who is no more
a thief that Caco, nor more of a crook than Andradilla, did not want to give me more than
four reales; Why see your grace, governor, how little
shame and little conscience! But at the cost, if your mercy no
came, that I made him vomit the profit, and that he had to know with
how many entered the Roman.
-What do you say to this? asked Sancho.
And the other replied that it was true what his opposite said, and there was no
I wanted to give him more than four reales because he gave them to him many times; and the
who expect cheap have to be restrained and take with a happy face what
they will give them, without counting with the winners, if they no longer knew
they are certainly crooks and what they earn is badly earned; so what, for
a sign that he was a good man and not a thief, as he said, none had
greater than not having wanted to give him anything; that always the fulleros are
tributaries of onlookers who know them.
"That's right," said the butler. See your grace, Mr. Governor, what is it
what is to be done by these men.
`` What has to be done is this, '' answered Sancho: `` you, profitable, well,
or bad, or indifferent, then give this your slasher a hundred reais, and
more, you have to pay thirty for the poor of the jail; and you, what
You have no job or benefit and you are walking on this island, take then
those hundred reais, and tomorrow all day leave this island exiled by
ten years, under penalty, if you break it, you will fulfill them in the other life,
hanging myself from a pillory, or, at least, the executioner for my errand; and
none of them replied, that I will seat their hand.
He unpacked one, received the other, the latter came off the island, and the former
He went home, and the governor said:
-Now, I will be able little, or I will remove these gambling houses, which I
it appears that they are very harmful.
"At least this one," said a clerk, "cannot be removed by your grace,
because it has a great character, and more is without comparison what he
he loses a year than what he takes out of the cards. Against other minor gambling dens
cantía your grace will be able to show its power, which are the ones that more damage
they do and cover up more insolences; that in the houses of the knights
the main men and the lords do not dare to use the famous crooks
his tricks; and, since the vice of the game has become a common exercise,
It is better that it be played in main houses than in that of an official,
where a midnight wretch is caught downstairs and skinned alive.
"Agora, clerk," said Sancho, "I know there is much to say in that."
And, at this, a clasp came that was holding a waiter, and said:
Governor, this young man was coming towards us, and, just as he
justice, turned his back and began to run like a deer, a sign that
It must be some criminal. I set out after him, and, if it weren't for
He stumbled and fell, never to reach him.
-Why were you running away, man ? asked Sancho.
To which the waiter replied:
-Sir, for excusing yourself from answering the many questions that the justices
make.
-What job do you have?
-Weaver.
-And what do you knit?
-Irons of spears, with good license from your mercy.
-Are you funny to me? Are you picking yourself up as a chocarrero? It's okay! And where
Are you going now?
- Sir, to take the air.
-And where do you take the air in this island?
-Where it blows.
-Well: you answer very on purpose! You are discreet, young man; but do
It tells that I am the air, and that I blow you in the stern, and I direct you to the
jail. Asilde, hello, and take him, I'll make him sleep there without air
tonight!
`` Good Lord, '' said the waiter, `` so may your grace make me sleep in jail
how to make me king!
"Well, why won't I make you sleep in jail?" Sancho answered. No
Do I have the power to catch you and release you every and when I want?
`` No matter how much power your grace may have, '' said the waiter, `` it will not be enough
to make me sleep in jail.
- What do you mean not? Sancho replied. Then take it where you will see the
disappointment, although the warden wants to use him more than his interest
liberality; that I will give him a penalty of two thousand ducats if he lets you leave a
step from jail.
"This is all laughable," replied the waiter. The point is that they won't make me
sleep in jail how many live today.
`` Tell me, demon, '' said Sancho, `` do you have an angel to take you out and
remove the crickets that I intend to send you throw?
"Now, Senor Governor," replied the waiter with very good grace, "let us be
to reason and let's get to the point. Prosuppose your grace that commands me to take
to jail, and that they put shackles and chains on me, and that they put me in a
jail, and the warden is given serious penalties if he lets me out, and that he
it fulfills it as it is commanded; with all this, if I don't want to sleep, and
stay awake all night, not glued an eyelash, will it be your mercy
enough with all its power to make me sleep, if I don't want to?
`` No, by the way, '' said the secretary, `` and the man has gone out with his
intention.
`` So, '' said Sancho, `` you won't stop sleeping for anything other than
your will, and not for contravening mine.
"No, sir," said the waiter, "I don't think so."
"Well, walk with God," said Sancho; gone to sleep at your house, and God
give a good sleep, which I don't want to take away from you; but advise us that from here
Go ahead, do not make fun of justice, because you will run into one that
Hit the mockery on the hooves.
The waiter left, and the governor continued with his rounds, and from there to
Two brackets came, bringing a man seized, and said:
-Mr Governor, this one who looks like a man is not, but a woman, and not ugly,
who comes dressed in the habit of a man.
Two or three lanterns came to his eyes, in the light of which they discovered a
face of a woman, apparently sixteen or a few years older, collected
the hair with a net of gold and green silk, beautiful as a thousand
pearls. They looked her up and down, and saw that she was wearing
red silk, with garters of white taffeta and ribbons of gold and pearl;
the greguescos were green, made of cloth of gold, and a skip or ropilla de
the same, loose, under which he wore a doublet of very fine gold cloth
and white, and the shoes were white and men's. He had no girded sword,
but a very rich dagger, and on the fingers, many very good rings.
Finally, the girl seemed fine to all, and none of them knew her
they saw it, and the natives of the place said they could not think who
was, and the acquaintances of the taunts that were to be made to Sancho
were the ones who were most admired, because that event and finding did not come
ordered by them; and thus, they were doubtful, waiting where the
case.
Sancho was amazed at the beauty of the girl, and asked who she was,
where he was going and what occasion had prompted him to dress in that habit.
She, laying eyes on the ground with honest shame, replied:
-I cannot, sir, say so in public what I cared so much outside
secret; I want one thing to be understood: that I am not a thief or a person
fabulous, but a wretched maiden whom the force of jealousy has
made to break the decorum that is due to honesty.
Hearing this, the butler said to Sancho:
-Have, Mr. Governor, separate the people, because this lady with less
Empacho can say what I want.
Thus commanded the governor; they all turned away, if they were not the steward,
maestresala and the secretary. So seeing themselves alone, the maiden went on
saying:
- «I, gentlemen, am the daughter of Pedro Pérez Mazorca, landlord of the wool
from this place, which often goes to my father's house. "
-That's no way, -said the butler-, ma'am, because I know very
Well done to Pedro Pérez and I know that he has no child, neither male nor female; and
more, that you say that he is your father, and then you add that he usually goes many
sometimes at your father's house.
"I had already hit on it," said Sancho.
"Now, gentlemen, I am troubled, and I do not know what I am saying to myself," replied the
maid-; but the truth is that I am the daughter of Diego de la Llana, who
all your mercedes must know.
`` That still has a path, '' replied the butler, `` because I know Diego de
la Llana, and I know that he is a principal and wealthy nobleman, and that he has a son and
a daughter, and that after she became widowed there has been no one in this whole place
that he can say that he has seen the face of his daughter; who has it so
enclosed that does not allow the sun to see it; and, with all this, fame says
which is extremely beautiful.
"That is the truth," replied the maiden, "and that daughter is me; yes fame
lie or not in my beauty you will have already, gentlemen, disappointed, because I
you have seen.
And, in this, he began to cry tenderly; seeing which the secretary,
He reached the ear of the maestresala and said very step:
-There is no doubt that something must have happened to this poor maiden
of importance, because in such a suit, and at such hours, and being so main,
he walks outside his house.
"There is no doubt about that," replied the steward; and more, that this suspicion
their tears confirm.
Sancho consoled her with the best reasons that he knew, and asked her that without
no fear told them what had happened to him; that everyone would try
remedy it with many truths and by all possible means.
"" It is the case, gentlemen, "she answered," that my father has kept me locked up.
ten years ago, which are the same as my mother eats the earth. At home
they say mass in a rich oratory, and in all this time I have not seen that the
sun in the sky by day, and the moon and stars by night, I don't even know what they are
streets, squares, or temples, not even men, apart from my father and a
brother of mine, and of Pedro Pérez the landlord, who, because he ordinarily entered
in my house, I wanted to say that he was my father, for not declaring mine.
This confinement and this refusal to leave home, even to church,
It has been many days and months that it has brought me very heartbroken; I would like to see the
world, or, at least, the town where I was born, it seems to me that this desire
went against the good decorum that the leading maids should keep to themselves
a month more. When he heard that they ran bulls and played reeds, and
performed comedies, I asked my brother, who is a year younger than
I, to tell me what those things were and many others that I have not
viewed; he declared it to me in the best ways he knew how, but it was all
make me want to see him more. Finally, to cut my story short
perdition, I say that I begged and asked my brother, never to ask or
I would beg ... »
And she started crying again. The butler said:
`` Please continue, madam, and have just told us what has happened to you,
that his words and his tears hold us all in suspense.
`` Few remain for me to say, '' replied the maiden, `` although many tears
yes to cry, because misplaced desires cannot bring with them
other discounts than similar ones.
The beauty of the maiden had sat on the soul of the maestresa, and
her lanterns came again to see her again; and it seemed to him that they were not
tears which he cried, but pearl or dew of the meadows, and even the
knitted up and down to oriental pearls, and she was looking forward to
misfortune was not as much as the signs of her crying and
of their sighs. The governor despaired of the delay that the
wench to expand his story, and told him to just have them more
Suspensions, that it was late and there was still a long way to go from town. She, between
broken sobs and malformed sighs, he said:
- «My misfortune is not another, nor is my misfortune another but that I begged my
brother to dress me in men's habits with one of his dresses and to
He would take me out one night to see the whole town, when our father slept;
he, bothered by my pleas, consented with my wish, and, putting this
dressed and he dressing in another of mine, which is like he was born, because he did not
He has beard hair and looks like nothing but a most beautiful maiden, tonight,
There must be an hour or so, we left the house; and, guided
of our waiter and ruined speech, we have surrounded the whole town, and
When we wanted to go home, we saw a large crowd of people coming, and my
Brother told me: `` Sister, this must be the round: lighten your feet and
put wings on them, and come after me running, because they do not know us, what
it will be wrongly counted to us. '' And, saying this, he turned his back and began, no
I say to run, but to fly; I, less than six steps away, fell, with the
startled, and then the Minister of Justice arrived,
your mercies, where, by bad and capricious, I am ashamed before
many people."
`` Indeed, ma'am, '' said Sancho, `` hasn't another outrage happened to you, or
jealousy, as you said at the beginning of your story, did not get you out of
your house?
-Nothing has happened to me, nor did they make me jealous, but only the desire to see
world, which did not extend to more than to see the streets of this place.
And he just confirmed to be true what the maid said to arrive at the
brackets with his prisoner brother, whom one of them reached when he fled
of his sister. He had nothing but a rich skirt and a damask tablecloth
blue with fine gold handrails, the head without touching or with anything else
adorned that with her same hair, which were gold rings, as they were
blond and curly. They parted with the governor, steward and steward,
and, unheard by his sister, they asked him how he came in that suit, and
he, with no less shame and embarrassment, told how his sister had
told, that the loving maestresala received great pleasure. But
Governor told them:
-By the way, gentlemen, this has been a great predator, and to tell
this foolishness and daring were not necessary so long, nor so many
tears and sighs; What with saying: `` We are so-and-so, let us
we left our parents' house with this invention, just for
curiosity, without any other design '', the story will end, and no
moan, and cry, and give it.
`` That is the truth, '' replied the maiden, `` but your graces know that
the confusion I have had has been so much that it has not let me keep the
term that should.
"Nothing has been lost," answered Sancho. Come on, and we'll leave you
mercedes in his father's house; perhaps he will not have missed them. And, from here
Go ahead, do not appear so childish, nor so eager to see the world, that the
honored maiden, broken leg, and at home; and the woman and the hen,
by walking they lose ain; and the one who is eager to see, also has desire
to be seen. I say no more.
The young man thanked the governor for the favor he wanted to give them
return them to their house, and thus, they headed towards her, who was not very
Far from there. They arrived, then, and, the brother throwing a china to a grate,
at once a maid came down, who was waiting for them, and opened the door for them.
door, and they entered, leaving everyone in awe of their kindness
and beauty like the desire they had to see the world, at night and without going out
of the place; but they attributed everything to their young age.
The headmaster was pierced his heart, and then he proposed another day
to ask his father for his wife, assuming that he would not deny her,
for being the servant of the duke; and even Sancho had wishes and dreams
to marry the boy with Sanchica, his daughter, and decided to put him in a
his time, implying that to a governor's daughter no husband
it could be denied.
With this, the round of that night was over, and two days from there the
government, with which they de-rooted and erased all their designs, as
you will see ahead.
Chapter L. Where it is declared who were the charmers and executioners who
they whipped the owner and pinched and scratched Don Quixote, with the event
that had the page who took the letter to Teresa Sancha, Sancho Panza's wife
Says Cide Hamete, a very punctual scrutinizer of the atoms of this true
history, that at the time that Dona Rodríguez left her room to go to
Don Quixote's stay, another landlady who slept with her felt it, and
that, as all the owners are friends of knowing, understanding and smelling, she left
behind her, with so much silence, that the good Rodríguez did not miss him; and,
just as the owner saw her enter Don Quixote's ranch, why not
the general custom that all owners have of being
gossipy, at the moment he went to put his mistress the duchess in a peak,
how Dona Rodríguez stayed in Don Quixote's room.
The duchess told the duke, and asked permission for her and
Altisidora came to see what that owner wanted with Don Quixote; the
Duke gave it to her, and both of them, with great care and calm, step by step,
they came to stand near the door of the room, and so close that they heard
everything that they spoke inside; and, when the Duchess heard that Rodriguez had
thrown into the street the Aranjuez of its sources, could not suffer, no less
Altisidora; and thus, full of anger and desirous of revenge, they entered
knock on the room, and they charged Don Quixote and beat the duenna
in the way that is counted; because the insults that go right against the
beauty and presumption of women, greatly awakens in them the
anger and ignites the desire for revenge.
The duchess told the duke what had happened to her, of which she was very pleased,
and the Duchess, continuing with her intention to mock and receive
pastime with Don Quixote, he dispatched the page who had made the figure of
Dulcinea at the concert of her disenchantment -which Sancho had well forgotten
Panza with the occupation of his government- Teresa Panza, his wife, with the
letter from her husband, and with another of hers, and with a large string of rich corals
presented.
So the story says that the page was very discreet and sharp, and, with desire
After serving his masters, he willingly left for Sancho's place; and,
Before entering it, he saw in a stream a lot of women were washing,
to whom he asked if they could tell him if a woman lived in that place
called Teresa Panza, wife of a certain Sancho Panza, squire of a
a gentleman named Don Quixote de la Mancha, at whose question he rose in
stood a girl who was washing, and said:
-That Teresa Panza is my mother, and that certain Sancho, my lord father, and that certain
gentleman, our master.
Come, maid, said the page, and show me your mother, for
I bring you a letter and a present from your father.
"I will do that very willingly, my lord," replied the girl, who showed
be fourteen years old, little more to less.
And, leaving the clothes she washed to another colleague, without touching or putting on shoes,
who was on her legs and disheveled, jumped in front of the horse of the
page, and said:
-Come on your mercy, that at the entrance of the town is our house, and my
mother in her, with great sorrow for not having known many days of my
sir father.
-Well, I take them so good -said the page- that he has to give well
thank goodness for them.
Finally, jumping, running and jumping, the girl came to town,
and, before entering his house, he called out from the door:
-Go out, Mother Teresa, come out, come out, a man comes here who brings letters
and other things from my good father.
To whose voices Teresa Panza, her mother, spun a flake of tow, with
a brown skirt. It seemed, depending on how short it was, that it had been cut by
Shameful place, with an equally brown corpezo and a breasted shirt.
She was not very old, although she was over forty, but strong,
stiff, sinewy and hazelnut; which, seeing her daughter, and the page at
horse, he said:
-What is this, girl? What lord is this?
"He is a servant of my wife, Dona Teresa Panza," replied the page.
And, saying and doing, he threw himself off the horse and went with great humility to
put of fennel before Mrs. Teresa, saying:
-Give me your hands, my lady Dona Teresa, well as a woman
legitimate and private of Mr. Don Sancho Panza, own governor of the
Barataria insula.
"Oh, my lord, get out of there; don't do that, 'Teresa replied,' I don't
I am not palatial at all, but a poor peasant, daughter of a stripaterrones and
wife of a walking squire, and not of any governor!
`` Your grace, '' replied the page, `` is a woman most worthy of a governor.
most archdignity; And, to prove this truth, may I receive this letter
and be present.
And he instantly drew from the skirt a string of corals with
gold, and put it around his neck and said:
-This letter is from the governor, and another that I bring and these corals are
of my lady the Duchess, who sends me to your mercy.
Teresa was stunned, and her daughter neither more nor less, and the girl said:
"Let them kill me if our lord master Don Quixote is not around here.
of having given father the government or county that so many times had
promised.
`` This is the truth, '' replied the page, `` that, out of respect for Mr.
Quixote, is now Mr. Sancho governor of the Barataria island, as
it will be seen by this letter.
`` Read it to me, gentleman gentleman, '' said Teresa, `` because, although I
I know how to spin, I can't read crumb.
"Neither have I," added Sanchica; but wait for me here, I'll go call
Whoever reads it, now is the priest himself, or the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, who
they will come very willingly, to hear news of my father.
-There is no reason to call anyone, I do not know how to spin, but I can read, and
I will read.
And so, he read it all, which, since it is already referred to, is not put here; and
then he took out another of the duchess, which read in this way:
Friend Teresa:
The good parts of the goodness and ingenuity of your husband Sancho
moved and forced to ask my husband the duke to give him a government of
one island, of many it has. I have news that he rules as a
Girifalte, of which I am very happy, and the Duke my lord, for the
consequent; for which I thank heaven very much for not having fooled me
in having chosen him for such a government; because I want the lady to know
Teresa, who can hardly find a good governor in the world, and such me
make me God as Sancho rules.
There I am sending you, my dear, a string of corals with golden stars; I me
It would be nice if it were made of oriental pearls, but whoever gives you the bone, will not
I would like to see her dead: the time will come when we meet and communicate,
and God knows what it will be. Entrust me to Sanchica, your daughter, and tell her about me
part that is rigged, that I have to marry her highly at least
think.
Tell me there are fat acorns in that place: send me up to two dozen,
that I will esteem them very much, for being from your hand, and write me long,
advising me of his health and well-being; and if there is any need
thing, you do not have to do more than gasp: that your mouth will be measured, and God
I kept it. From this place.
Her friend, how well she loves her,
The Duchess.
"Oh," said Teresa, hearing the letter, "and how good and how flat and what
humble lady! With these such ladies bury me, and not
hidalgas that are used in this town, who think that because they are hidalgas they
the wind has to touch them, and they go to church with as much fantasy as if
were the queens themselves, who do not seem to have anything but disgrace to look at
to a farmer; and you see here where this good lady, with being a duchess, I
Calls friend, and treats me as if I were her equal, that I may see her with him
tallest bell tower in La Mancha. And when it comes to acorns,
my lord, I will send his lordship a bushel, which may be fat
come to see the sight and the wonder. And for now, Sanchica, attend
that this gentleman gives himself: put this horse in order, and
stable güevos, and cut adunia bacon, and let's feed him like a
prince, that the good news that he has brought us and the good face that he
it has deserves it all; and, meanwhile, I will go out to give my neighbors the new
of our contentment, and the priest priest and Master Nicolás the barber, how
friends are and have been of your father.
"Yes, I will, mother," replied Sanchica; but look, you have to give me half
dese string; that I do not think my lady the Duchess is so silly,
he was to send her all.
"It's all for you, daughter," Teresa replied, "but let me bring some
days around my neck, which really seems to make my heart happy.
`` They will also be glad, '' said the page, `` when they see the trouble that comes in this
portamanteo, which is a very fine cloth dress that the governor only a
day he took to hunting, which all sent him to Mrs. Sanchica.
"May he live for me a thousand years," replied Sanchica, "and the one who brings him, neither more nor
less, and even two thousand, if need be.
In this Teresa went out of the house, with the letters, and with the string to the
neck, and was playing on the cards as if on a tambourine; and,
perhaps meeting the priest and Samson Carrasco, he began to dance
tell:
-A fee that now there is no poor relative! We have a little government! No, but
Take with me the most painted hidalga, that I will put as new!
-What is this, Teresa Panza? What crazy are these, and what roles are
those?
-It is no other madness but these are letters from duchesses and
governors, and these that I wear around my neck are fine corals; Hail Marys
and our fathers are of hammer gold, and I am a governor.
-De Dios en ayuso, we do not understand you, Teresa, nor do we know what you are saying.
"They can see it there," Teresa answered.
And gave them the cards. The priest read them so that Sansón Carrasco heard them, and
Samson and the priest looked at each other, as if in awe of what they had done.
read; and the bachelor asked who had brought those letters.
Teresa answered that they come with her to her house and they would see the messenger,
that he was a young man like a golden pine, and that he brought him another present that
it was worth more than so much. The priest removed the corals from his neck, and looked at them and
He looked at them, and, certifying that they were fine, returned to admire himself again, and
said:
-Because of the habit I have, I don't know what to say to me or what to think of these
letters and gifts present: on the one hand, I see and touch the fineness of these
corals, and on the other hand, I read that a duchess sent to ask for two dozen
acorns.
-Have me those measurements! Carrasco said then. Agora bien, let's see
to the bearer of this document, that we will inform ourselves of the difficulties that
are offered to us.
They did so, and Teresa returned with them. They found the page sifting a
little barley for his horse, and Sanchica cutting a torrezno to
stone him with güevos and feed the page, whose presence and good adornment
it pleased both of them very much; and, having greeted him politely, and he
Samson asked them to tell them news of both Don Quixote and
Sancho Panza; that, since they had read the letters of Sancho and the
Duchess, they were still confused and did not quite figure out what
that of the Sancho government, and more than one island, being all or the most
that is in the Mediterranean Sea of ​​His Majesty. To which the page replied:
-That Senor Sancho Panza is governor, there is no need to doubt it; from
whether or not it is the island that governs, I do not interfere in that, but it is enough that
be a place with more than a thousand neighbors; And as for the acorns, I say
that my lady the Duchess is so plain and so humble, that she did not, he said,
send a farmer to ask for acorns, but what happened to send a
borrow a comb from a neighbor of hers. Because I want you to know yours
mercedes that the ladies of Aragon, although they are so leading, are not so
punctuated and lifted like the Castilian ladies; with more simplicity they treat
with the people.
While in the middle of these talks, Sanchica jumped with a haul of güevos,
and asked the page:
Tell me, sir: does my lord father have trousers attacked after
who is governor?
"I have not looked into it," replied the page, "but it must bring."
"Oh my God," Sanchica replied, "and what about seeing my father with
pedorreras! Isn't it good but since I was born I have a desire to see my
father with leggings attacked?
"As with those things your grace will see him if he lives," replied the page.
For God's sake, he has been walking with papahígo, with only two months that
the government lasts.
The priest and the bachelor well saw that the page was speaking
slyly, but the fineness of the corals and the hunting dress that
Sancho would send and undo everything; that Teresa had already shown them the
dress. And they did not stop laughing at Sanchica's desire, especially when Teresa
said:
-Mr. Priest, take a tasting there if there is someone who goes to Madrid, or
Toledo, so that he can buy me a round, full-fledged executioner, and be at
use and of the best ones; that in truth in truth that I have of
honor my husband's government as much as I can, and even if I
anger, I have to go to that court, and take a car, like everyone else; than what
she has a governor husband very well can bring and support him.
-And how, mother! Sanchica said. Please God that it was earlier today than
tomorrow, even if those who saw me go sitting with my mother in
that car: `` Look at the one by which, daughter of the sick of garlic, and how it goes
sitting and lying in the car, like it was a mess! '' But they step on
the mud, and let me ride in my car, my feet off the ground. Wrong
year and bad month for how many murmurers there are in the world, and come to me
hot, and laugh people! Do I say okay, my mother?
-And what do you mean, daughter! Teresa answered. And all these fortunes,
and even older, my good Sancho has prophesied them to me, and you will see, daughter,
how not to stop until I become a countess: that everything is to begin to be fortunate;
and, as I have heard your good father say many times, that just as he is
yours is from the sayings, when they give you the heifer, run with
soguilla: when they give you a government, take it; when they give you a
county, grab him, and when they make you your, your, with some good gift,
pack it. No, but fall asleep, and do not respond to the fortunes and good joys
who are knocking at the door of your house!
-And what is given to me -added Sanchica- that whoever wants to say when I
see intoned and fanciful: "I saw the dog in cerro panties ...", and
the rest?
Hearing which the priest said:
-I can't believe but that all the lineage of the Panzas were born
each with a sack of sayings on the body: none of them have I seen
not spill them at all hours and in all the talks they have.
`` This is the truth, '' said the page, `` that Governor Sancho at each
step says them, and, although many do not come on purpose, they still give pleasure, and
my lady the duchess and the duke celebrate them very much.
"That your grace still affirms, my lord," said the bachelor, "to be
This is true of the Sancho government, and that there is a duchess in the world who
send presents and write? Because we, although we touch the present
and we have read the letters, we do not believe it, and we think that this is one of the
things of Don Quixote, our compatriot, who all think are made
by enchantment; And so I'm about to say that I want to touch and feel
your grace, to see if he is a fantastic ambassador or a man of meat and
bone.
`` Gentlemen, I do not know more about myself, '' replied the page, `` but I am an ambassador.
true, and that Mr. Sancho Panza is an effective governor, and that my
lords Duke and Duchess can and have given such government; and what i have
I have heard it said that this Sancho Panza behaves most courageously; yes in
This is an enchantment or not, your mercies dispute it there among them,
that I do not know anything else, for the oath that I take, which is for the life of my
parents, I have you alive and I love you and I love you very much.
"It may well be so," replied the bachelor, "but doubt Augustinus."
`` Doubt who will doubt, '' replied the page, `` the truth is what I have said, and
this one that has to walk always on the lie, like the oil on the water;
and if not, operibus credite, et non verbis: come one of your mercedes
with me, and they will see with their eyes what they do not believe through their ears.
-That's up to me -said Sanchica-: take me your mercy, sir, at the
haunches of his nag, that I will gladly go to see my lord father.
-The daughters of the governors should not go alone on the roads, but
accompanied by floats and bunks and a large number of servants.
`` Dear God, '' Sancha replied, `` I would go on a colt as well as
about a car. Found you have the finicky!
`` Shut up, mochacha, '' said Teresa, `` you don't know what you're saying to yourself, and this man
He is right: how about the weather, how about the temptation; when Sancho, Sancha,
and when governor, ma'am, and I don't know if he will say something.
"Senora Teresa says more than she thinks," said the page; and give me
eat and send me off later, because I plan to return this afternoon.
To which the priest said:
-Your grace will come to do penance with me, that Mrs. Teresa
he has more will than jewels to serve such a good guest.
Only the page refused; but, in effect, he had to grant it for its improvement, and the
The priest took him with him willingly, having instead of asking him
space for Don Quixote and his exploits.
The bachelor offered to write the letters to Teresa of the answer,
but she did not want the bachelor to meddle in her things, she had him
for something mocking; and so he gave a bun and two eggs to a monacillo who tasted
write, which wrote him two letters, one for her husband and one for the
Duchess, noted for her own caliber, which are no worse than in this
great history they put, as it will be seen later.
Chapter LI. On the progress of the government of Sancho Panza, with other events
such as good
The day dawned that followed the night of the governor's round, the
which the steward spent without sleeping, the thought on his face occupied,
verve and beauty of the disguised maiden; and the butler occupied what della
he lacked in writing to his masters what Sancho Panza did and said, so
admired both of his deeds and of his sayings: because his
words and actions, with discreet and silly hints.
Finally, the governor arose, and, by order of Dr. Pedro
Tough, they made him eat breakfast with a little preserves and four shots of
cold water, which Sancho would barter with a piece of bread and a bunch of
grapes; but, seeing that it was more force than will, he went through it,
with a lot of pain in his soul and fatigue in his stomach, making him believe Pedro
It was hard that the few and delicate delicacies enlivened the wit, which was the
that it was more convenient for people constituted in commanders and in serious trades,
where they have to take advantage not so much of the bodily forces as of the
of understanding.
With this sophistry Sancho suffered hunger, and such, that in his secret
it cursed the government and even to whom it had been given; but, with his hunger and
with his preserve, he began to judge that day, and the first thing that was offered to him
was a question that an outsider asked him, being present to all the
steward and the other acolytes, which was:
-Sir, a mighty river divided two terms of the same manor (and this
your mercy attentive, because the case is important and something
difficult). I say, then, that over this river was a bridge, and at the end
della, a gallows and a house of audience, in which ordinarily
There were four judges who judged the law set by the owner of the river, of the
bridge and the manor, which was in this way: "If someone passes through this
Bridge from one part to another, he must first swear where and what he is going; what if
I will swear truth, let him pass; and if I tell a lie, die for it by hanging
on the gallows shown there, without any remission. "Knowing this law and the
rigorous condition of it, many passed, and then in what they swore they
I saw that they were telling the truth, and the judges let them pass
freely. So it came to pass that, taking an oath from a man, he swore and said
that for the oath that he was taking, that he was going to die on that gallows that there
I was, and not to something else. The judges noticed the oath and said:
If we let this man pass freely, he lied in his oath, and,
according to the law, he must die; And if we hang him, he swore he would die
on that gallows, and, having sworn truth, by the same law must be
free''. Ask at your mercy, Mr. Governor, what will the judges of the
such a man; that even now are doubtful and suspended. And, having
having heard of the keen and elevated understanding of your grace, I
they sent me to beg at your mercy for him to give his opinion
in such an intricate and doubtful case.
To which Sancho replied:
-By the way, those gentlemen who sent me could have
Excuse me, because I am a man who has more of a show than a sharp one;
but, with all that, repeat the business again so that I
understand: maybe it could be that it hit the milestone.
The questioner returned again and again to refer what he had said first,
and Sancho said:
-In my opinion, I will declare this business on two pallets, and it is like this:
such a man swears that he will die on the gallows, and if he dies on it, he swore
truth, and by the law he deserves to be free and to pass the bridge; if not
They hang him, he swore a lie, and by the same law he deserves to be hanged.
"This is how the governor says," said the messenger; and as for the
integrity and understanding of the case, there is nothing more to ask or doubt.
`` So I say, now, '' Sancho replied, `` that of this man that part that
swore the truth, let her pass, and the one who told a lie hang her, and this
In this way, the condition of the passage will be met to the letter.
`` Well, Mr. Governor, '' replied the questioner, `` it will be necessary for him to
man is divided into parts, into lying and true; and if it is divided, by
Force has to die, and thus nothing is achieved that the law requires,
and it is of express necessity that it is fulfilled.
"Come here, good man," answered Sancho; this passenger you say,
Either I am a joint, or he has the same reason to die as to live and
pass the bridge; because if the truth saves you, the lie condemns you
you too; and, this being the case, as it is, it seems that you say to
those gentlemen who sent you to me that, well, the reasons for
condemn or destroy him, let him pass freely, since it is always
praised more for doing good than bad, and I would give this signed my name, yes
knew how to sign; and in this case I have not talked about mine, but it came to me
to memory a precept, among many others that my master Don Quixote gave me
the night before he became governor of this island: what was it that,
when justice was in doubt, I chose and embraced the
mercy; And God has wanted me to remember now, for coming in this
case like mold.
That's right, "replied the butler," and I have for myself that Lycurgus himself, who
gave laws to the Lacedaemonians, could not give a better sentence than that
great belly has given. And finish with this the hearing this morning, and I will give
order as the lord governor eat much to your liking.
-That's what I ask, and straight bars -said Sancho-: give me something to eat, and let it rain
and doubts about me, that I will wake them up in the air.
The butler kept his word, it seemed to him that it was a conscience to kill
starving such a discreet governor; and more, that I thought to conclude with him
that same night making him the last mockery that he brought in commission of
make him.
It happened, then, that, having eaten that day against the rules and aphorisms
of doctor Tirteafuera, when lifting from the tablecloths, a mail entered with
a letter from Don Quixote to the governor. Sancho sent the secretary to
read it to himself, and that if something worthy of
secret, read it aloud. The secretary did so, and, reviewing it
first, he said:
-It can be read aloud that what Mr. Don Quixote writes to
your mercy deserves to be stamped and written in letters of gold, and it says
So:
Letter from Don Quixote de la Mancha to Sancho Panza, governor of the island
Barataria
When I expected to hear news of your carelessness and impertinences, Sancho friend,
I heard them of your discretion, that I gave particular thanks to the
Heaven, which from manure knows how to raise the poor, and from fools
make discreet. Tell me that you rule as if you were a man, and that you are
man as if you were a beast, according to the humility with which you treat yourself; and
I want you to warn, Sancho, that many times it is convenient and necessary,
the authority of the office, going against the humility of the heart; because the good
adornment of the person who is placed in serious charges must be in accordance with
what they ask for, and not to the extent of what their humble condition
bows. Dress well, a compound stick does not look like a stick. I do not say that
bring trinkets or finery, nor that being a judge you dress as a soldier, but
adorn yourself with the habit that your trade requires, provided it is clean and
well composed.
To win the will of the people you govern, among others you have to do
two things: the one, to be well raised with everyone, although this is already
I said; and the other, to procure the abundance of the maintenance; not
There is something that more fatigue the hearts of the poor than hunger and
famine.
Don't do a lot of pragmatics; and if you do, make sure they are good, and,
above all, that they be kept and fulfilled; that the pragmatic ones that I don't know
keep, the same is that if they were not; before they imply that the
prince who had discretion and authority to do them, did not have the courage to
make them save; and the laws that frighten and are not enforced, they come
to be like the beam, king of the frogs: that at first frightened them, and with
time they belittled her and climbed on her.
Be the father of virtues and stepfather of vices. Don't be always
rigorous, not always soft, and choose the middle between these two estremos,
that in this is the point of discretion. Visit prisons,
butcher shops and squares, that the presence of the governor in such places
is of great importance: it comforts the prisoners, who await the brevity of
his office; It is coconut to the butchers, who by then equal the pesos,
and he is scarecrow to the pleasures, for the same reason. Don't show yourself though
by chance you are - which I do not believe - greedy, womanizer or glutton;
because, in knowing the people and those who treat you your inclination
determined, over there they will give you battery, until you fall in the deep of
doom.
Look and review, pass and review the advice and documents that I gave you for
written before you leave here to your government, and you will see how you find
them, if you keep them, an aid from the coast that will bear your work and
difficulties that are offered to the governors at every step. Write to
your lords and show them grateful, that ingratitude is the daughter of
pride, and one of the biggest sins known, and the person that is
grateful to those who have done him good, indicates that he will also be grateful to
God, what good did He do to you and what He does to you all the time.
The Duchess sent one of her own with your dress and another present to your
woman Teresa Panza; at times we wait for an answer.
I have been a little ill-disposed of a certain crawling that happened to me
not very close to my nose; but it was nothing, what if there are charming
that they mistreat me, there are also those that defend me.
Let me know if the butler who is with you had anything to do with the actions of the
Trifaldi, as you suspected, and of everything that happens to you you will give me
Warning, because the road is so short; how much more, that I plan to leave soon
this idle life in which I am, because I was not born for it.
A business has been offered to me, which I think will put me in disgrace
of these gentlemen; but, although I am given a lot, I am not given anything, well, well
Anyway, I have to fulfill my profession before with your taste, according to
to what is usually said: amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas. Tell you this
Latin because I imply that, after you are governor, you will have
learned. And God, who keeps you from having no pity on you.
Your friend,
Don Quijote of La Mancha.
Sancho listened to the letter with great attention, and it was celebrated and
discreet from those who heard it; and then Sancho got up from the table, and,
calling the secretary, he shut himself up with him in his room, and, without delaying
more, he wanted to answer later to his lord Don Quixote, and said to the secretary
that, without adding or subtracting anything, was writing what he
tell himself, and he did so; and the letter of the reply was of the following tenor:
Letter from Sancho Panza to Don Quixote de la Mancha
The occupation of my business is so great that I have no place to scratch myself
my head, not even to cut my nails; and so, I bring them so grown
which God remedies it. I say this, my lord of my soul, because your mercy
do not be scared if until now I have not given notice of my good or bad being in
this government, in which I am hungrier than when we both walked around
the jungles and the depopulated.
The duke, my lord, wrote to me the other day, advising me that they had
certain spies entered this island to kill me, and until now I have not
discovered other than a certain doctor who is in this salaried place
to kill how many governors come here: his name is Doctor Pedro
He is tough, and he is a native of Tirteafuera: because you see your grace what name
so as not to fear that I will die at his hands! This such doctor says himself of
himself that he does not cure diseases when there are them, but that he
prevent, so that they do not come; and the drugs he uses are diet and more
diet, until you put the person on the raw bones, as if he were not older
the weakness is bad than the fever. Finally, he starves me to death, and
I'm dying of spite, because when I thought of coming to this government to
eat hot and drink cold, and recreate the body between sheets of
Holland, on feather mattresses, I have come to do penance, as if
he was a hermit; and, since I don't do it of my own free will, I think that, after
out, the devil has to take me.
Until now I have not played law or taken a bribe, and I cannot think of
what is this about; because here they have told me that the governors that this
The insula usually come, before entering it, or they have been given or
the people borrowed a lot of money, and that this is ordinary custom in
the others who go to governments, not only in this one.
Last night, walking around, I came across a very beautiful maiden in a man's suit and
a brother of his in the habit of a woman; my maestresala fell in love with the girl, and
chose her in his imagination for his wife, as he has said, and I chose
the waiter for my son-in-law; Today the two of us will talk about our
thoughts with the father of both, who is a certain Diego de la Llana,
hidalgo and old christian as much as you want.
I visit the squares, as your grace advises me, and yesterday I found a
The grocer that sold new hazelnuts, and I found out that she had mixed
a hanega of new hazelnuts another of old, vain and rotten; apply them
all for the children of the doctrine, who would know how to distinguish them well, and
I sentenced her not to enter the plaza for fifteen days. They have told me that
I did bravely; what I know to say at your mercy is that it is fame in this
people that there are no people worse than the pleasures, because they are all
shameless, soulless and daring, and I believe so, for which I have
seen in other towns.
That my lady the duchess wrote to my wife Teresa Panza and
sending you the present that your grace says, I am very satisfied, and
I will try to be grateful for his time: may your mercy kiss him
hands on my part, saying that I say that he has not thrown it on deaf ears,
as you will see by the play.
I would not want your grace to have a bead of disgust with those misgivings.
gentlemen, because if your worship is angry with them, of course it must
redound to my harm, and it will not be good that, because it is given to me for advice that
be grateful, that your mercy is not with whom so many mercies you
He has made and with so much gift he has been treated in his castle.
That of the crawling I do not understand, but I imagine it must be one of the
bad misdeeds that the bad enchanters usually use with your mercy;
I'll know when we meet.
I would like to send something to your mercy, but I don't know what to send, if not
It is some tubes of syringes, which are made with bladders in this
very curious insula; Although if my job lasts, I will look for what to send from
haldas or sleeves.
If my wife Teresa Panza wrote to me, please pay the postage and
send me the letter, I have a great desire to know the state of my house,
of my wife and my children. And with this, God free at your mercy from evil
enchanting intentions, and I took good and peace from this
government, which I doubt, because I intend to leave him with life, as he treats me
Dr. Pedro Recio.
Servant of your mercy,
Sancho Panza, the Governor.
The secretary closed the letter and then sent the post; and, joining the
Mockers of Sancho, gave each other order how to dismiss him from the government;
and that afternoon Sancho spent it doing some ordinances regarding the good
government of what he imagined to be the island, and ordered that there should be no
regatones of the bastimentos in the republic, and that they could put in it
came from the parties they wanted, with an addition that declared the place of
where it was, to price it according to his estimate, goodness and fame, and the
If he watered it or changed his name, he lost his life for it.
It moderated the price of all footwear, mainly that of shoes, by
seem to him that he was running with exorbitancy; put a tax on the salaries of the
servants, who walked with free rein on the road of interest; put
very serious penalties to those who sing lewd and decomposed songs, nor
by night or by day. He ordered that no blind man sing miracle in verses if not
take authentic testimony of being true, because it seems to him that the most
that the blind sing are feigned, to the detriment of the true.
He made and created a bailiff of the poor, not to persecute them, but to
to examine them if they were, because in the shadow of the feigned manliness and
from the false sore walk thieving arms and drunken health. On
resolution: he ordered things so good that to this day they are kept in that
place, and the constitutions of the great governor Sancho Panza are named.
Chapter LII. Where the adventure of the second Sorrowful owner is told, or
Anguished, called by another name Dona Rodríguez
Cide Hamete tells us that when Don Quixote was already healthy from his arms, he
It seemed that the life he had in that castle was against the entire order of
professing cavalry, and thus, determined to ask the dukes for leave
to leave for Zaragoza, whose parties were close by, where he thought
win the harness that is conquered at such festivals.
And, being one day at table with the dukes, and beginning to put his
intention and ask for the license, you see here untimely enter through the door of
the great hall two women, as it later appeared, covered in mourning
head to toe, and on one of them, arriving at Don Quixote, he began to
the feet stretched long to long, the mouth sewn with the feet of don
Quixote, and gave such sad, deep and painful moans,
which confused all who heard and looked at it; and, although the
dukes thought it was some mockery that their servants wanted to do to Don
Quixote, still, watching with the fervor that the woman sighed, moaned and
cried, had them doubtful and suspended, until Don Quixote, compassionate,
lifted off the ground and made him uncover and remove his cloak from
tearful face.
She did it like that, and she showed herself to be what you could never think of, because
discovered the face of Dona Rodríguez, the mistress of the house, and the other mourning
It was his daughter, the mocked son of the rich farmer. They all admired
those who knew her, and more the dukes than anyone; that, since the
They thought he was stupid and of good pasta, not so much that he came to do crazy things.
Finally, Dona Rodríguez, turning to the gentlemen, said:
-Your Excellencies are served to give me license that I set aside a little
with this gentleman, because that is how it is convenient to get out of business successfully in
that has given me the audacity of an ill-intentioned villain.
The duke said that he would give it to her, and that she should converse with Don Quixote
as much as it came to him in desire. She, straightening her voice and face to don
Quixote said:
-Days ha, brave knight, that I have realized the unreason and
treachery that a bad farmer has a date for my very dear and beloved fixed, that
It is this unfortunate woman who is present here, and you have promised me
go back for her, straightening the one-eyed man that they have dated, and now she has
it has come to my news that you want to leave this castle, in search of the
good fortune may God give you; and thus, I would like that, before you
Sneak down those roads, challenge this untamed rustic, and
you made him marry my daughter, in fulfillment of the word that
he gave of being her husband, before and first that I was with her; why think
that the duke my lord has to do me justice is to ask for pears from the elm, for
the occasion that I have already declared at your mercy in purity. And with this,
May our Lord give you good health, and do not abandon us.
To whose reasons Don Quixote replied, with great gravity and prosopopoeia:
-Good mistress, temper your tears, or, to put it better, wipe them away and
save your sighs, that I take charge of the remedy of your
daughter, who would have been better off not having been so easy to believe
lovers' promises, which, for the most part, are light in
promise and very heavy to fulfill; and so, with permission from the duke my lord,
I will then leave in search of you heartless young man, and I will find him, and
I will defy, and I will kill him every and when he is excused from fulfilling the
promised word; that the main business of my profession is to forgive
the humble and punish the proud; I mean: run to the
wretched and destroy the rigorous.
`` It is not necessary, '' replied the duke, `` that your grace should put to work
to look for the rustic of whom this good owner complains, nor is it necessary
nor that your grace ask me for a license to challenge him; that I
I consider challenged, and I take it upon myself to let you know this challenge, and that
I hit him, and come to answer for himself in this my castle, where both
I will give a safe field, keeping all the conditions that in such acts
tend and should be kept, equally keeping their justice to each one, as
all those princes who give a free field to
those who fight on the terms of their lordships.
-Well, with that insurance and with good license of your greatness -replied Don
Quixote-, from here I say that for this time I renounce my nobility, and
I flatten and adjust with the plainness of the damager, and I do the same with him,
enabling him to be able to fight with me; and thus, although absent,
defy and crawl, because he was wrong to defraud this poor woman, who
She was a maiden and because of her she is not, and that she has to keep her word
who gave him to be her legitimate husband, or to die in the lawsuit.
And then, taking off a glove, he threw it in the middle of the room, and the duke
raised him, saying that, as he had already said, he accepted the challenge in
name of his vassal, and indicated the term from there to six days; and the field,
in the square of that castle; and weapons, the customary of the
knights: spear and shield, and braided harness, with all other pieces,
without deception, hoax or superstition, examined and seen by the
field judges.
-But, above all things, it is necessary that this good owner and this bad
maiden place the right of their justice in the hands of Mr. Don Quixote;
that otherwise nothing will be done, nor will such
challenge.
"I do put it," replied the owner.
`` And so am I, '' added the daughter, all tearful and all shameful and evil.
mood.
Taking, then, this point, and the duke having imagined what
to do in the case, the mourners left, and the Duchess ordered that
henceforth they were not treated as their maids, but as ladies
adventurers who came to demand justice at her house; and so, they gave them a room
apart and served as outsiders, not without the fright of the others
maids, who did not know where the folly and
Doña Rodríguez and her naughty daughter.
While in this, to finish rejoicing the party and give a good end to the
food, you see here where the page who brought the letters and
present to Teresa Panza, wife of Governor Sancho Panza, whose
arrival, the dukes were very pleased, eager to know what
it had happened on his trip; and, wondering, answered the page that he did not
could say so in public not with brief words: that his excellences
they were served to leave him alone, and that in the meantime they entertained
with those letters. And, taking out two cards, he placed them in the hands of the
duchess. The one said in the superscript: Letter to my lady the duchess
such, I don't know where, and the other: To my husband Sancho Panza, governor of the
Insula Barataria, may God prosper more years than me. He did not cook the
bread, as they say, to the duchess until reading her letter, and opening it and
read to himself, and seeing that he could read it aloud so that the duke and
the bystanders heard her, she read in this way:
Letter from Teresa Panza to the Duchess
I was very happy, my lady, the letter that your greatness wrote me,
that in truth he had her well desired. The string of corals is very good,
and my husband's hunting dress is not far behind. That your honor
have made Sancho governor, my consort, he has welcomed everything
this place, since there is no one who believes it, mainly the priest, and more
Nicolás the barber, and Sansón Carrasco the bachelor; but it is not given to me
any; that, as it is so, as it is, let each one say what they want;
Although, if he is going to tell the truth, not to come the corals and the dress, either
I would believe it, because in this town everyone has my husband for a joint,
and that, taken from ruling a herd of goats, they cannot imagine why
government can be good. God do it, and direct it as I see that they have
need their children.
I, lady of my soul, am determined, with permission from your mercy, to
put this good day in my house, going to court to lie down in a car,
to break the eyes of a thousand envious that I already have; and so, I beg of you
Excellency send my husband to send me some money, and let it be something what,
because in court there are large expenses: that the bread is worth real, and the
meat, the pound, at thirty maravedís, which is a judgment; and if you want
don't go, let me know in advance, because my feet are boiling from
get on my way; what my friends and my neighbors tell me that, if me and my
daughter, we are plump and pompous at court, my
husband for me more than I for him, being forced to ask many:
'' -Who are these ladies of this car? '' And a servant of mine answered: '' -The
wife and daughter of Sancho Panza, governor of the Barataria island ''; and
In this way Sancho will be known, and I will be esteemed, and Rome for everything.
Condolences, how heavy can I be, that this year they have not picked acorns in
this town; with all that, I send your Highness up to half a bushel,
one by one I went to pick them up and choose the mountain, and I didn't find them anymore
greater; I wish they were like ostrich eggs.
Do not forget your pomposity to write to me, that I will be careful
of the answer, notifying of my health and of everything that has to be notified
from this place, where I remain praying to Our Lord to keep your greatness,
and I do not forget. Sancha, my daughter, and my son kiss at your mercy the
hands.
The one who has more desire to see your lordship than to write it, her
maid,
Teresa Panza.
Great was the pleasure everyone received from hearing Teresa Panza's letter,
chiefly the dukes, and the duchess asked Don Quixote to say if
It would be good to open the letter that was coming to the governor, who he imagined should
to be beautiful. Don Quixote said that he would open it to please them, and so
He did, and saw it say this way:
Letter from Teresa Panza to Sancho Panza her husband
I received your letter, Sancho of my soul, and I promise and swear to you as
Christian Catholic who did not miss two fingers to drive me crazy
happy. Look, brother: when I got to hear that you are governor, I
I thought there falling dead of pure joy, you already know that they say that it kills like that
sudden joy like great pain. Sanchica, your daughter, they left
the waters without feeling it, of pure contentment. The dress you sent me had
front, and the corals that my lady the Duchess sent me around my neck, and the
cards in hand, and the bearer of them present there, and, with all that,
I believed and thought that what I saw and what I touched was all dreams; because,
Who could think that a goat herder would become governor
of insulas? You know, friend, what my mother said that it was necessary to live
a lot to see a lot: I say it because I intend to see more if I live more; why not
I plan to stop until you see a landlord or a tax collector, which are trades that,
Although the devil takes those who misuse them, in short, they always have and
they handle money. My lady the duchess will tell you my desire to go to the
court; look at yourself in it, and let me know of your pleasure, that I will try to honor you in
she walking in the car.
The priest, the barber, the bachelor, and even the sacristan cannot believe that
you are governor, and they say that everything is enchantment, or things of enchantment,
as are all those of Don Quixote your master; and Samson says that he has to go to
look for you and get the government out of your head, and Don Quixote the madness of
helmets; I just laugh, and look at my string, and trace the
dress that I have to make yours to our daughter.
I sent some acorns to my lady the duchess; I wish they were gold.
Send me some strings of pearls, if they are used on that island.
The news from this place is that Berrueca married her daughter to a painter from
bad hand, who came to this town to paint what came out; he sent him
Council paint the arms of His Majesty on the doors of the City Hall,
asked for two ducats, gave them in advance, worked eight days, after
who did not paint anything, and said that he could not paint so many trinkets;
The money returned, and, with all that, he married as a good officer; truth
is that he has already put down the brush and taken the hoe, and goes to the field like
gentleman. The son of Pedro de Lobo has been ordained of degrees and crown,
with the intention of becoming a cleric; Supolo Minguilla, Mingo's granddaughter
Silvato, and has put demand that he has given word of marriage;
Gossip means that she has been pregnant with him, but he denies it to
close feet.
Hogaño there are no olives, nor is there a drop of vinegar in all this
village. A company of soldiers passed through here; they took three on the way
girls of this town; I do not want to tell you who they are: maybe they will return, and no
there will be a lack of those who take them for women, with their good or bad marks.
Sanchica makes points of randas; earn eight horros maravedís every day, which
He is putting them in a piggy bank to help his trousseau; but now what is
daughter of a governor, you will give her the dowry without her working it. The
fountain in the square dried up; lightning struck the pillory, and there they give them to me
all.
I await an answer from this and the resolution of my going to court; and with this,
God save you more years than me or so many, because I would not want to leave you without
me in this world.
Your wife,
Teresa Panza.
The letters were solenized, laughed at, esteemed and admired; and to
finish putting the stamp, the mail arrived, the one that brought the one that Sancho
sent Don Quixote, which was also read publicly, which he put in
doubts the stupidity of the governor.
The duchess retired, to find out from the page what had happened to him in the
place of Sancho, who told him very at length, without leaving
circumstance that did not refer; gave him the acorns, and more a cheese than
Teresa gave him, for being very good, that he was ahead of those of Tronchón
The Duchess received it with great pleasure, with which we will leave her, for
tell the end of the government of the great Sancho Panza, flower and mirror of
all the island governors.
Chapter LIII. Of the tired end and auction that the government of Sancho had
Belly
'' To think that in this life things have to last forever in a state
is thinking about the toilet; Before it seems that she goes all round, I say,
all around: spring follows summer, summer follows summer, summer follows
fall, and fall to winter, and winter to spring, and so it returns to
walk the time with this continuous wheel; alone human life runs to its
end light more than time, without waiting to be renewed if not in the other,
that it has no terms that limit it. '' This says Cide Hamete, philosopher
Mohammedan; because this to understand the lightness and instability of life
present, and of the duration of the eternal that is expected, many without fire of
faith, but with natural light, they have understood it; but here, our author
He says by the speed with which it was finished, it was consumed, it was undone, it left like
in shadow and smoke the government of Sancho.
Who, being the seventh night of the days of his government in his bed, did not
fed up with bread and wine, but with judging and giving opinions and doing
statutes and pragmatics, when sleep, despite and despite hunger,
his eyelids began to close, he heard such a great noise of bells and
voices, which seemed only that the entire island was sinking. Sat on the
bed, and he was attentive and listening, to see if he realized what
it could be the cause of so great an uproar; but not only did he not know it, but,
adding to the noise of voices and bells that of infinite trumpets and
drums, he was more confused and full of fear and terror; and, rising in
foot, put on some slippers, because of the humidity of the ground, and, without putting
overclothes to lift, or anything of the sort, went out to the door of his
room, in time when he saw more than twenty
people with burning axes in their hands and with swords
drawn, all shouting loudly:
- Weapon, weapon, Mr. Governor, weapon !; that infinite enemies have entered
on the island, and we are lost if your industry and courage do not help us.
With this noise, fury and uproar they came to where Sancho was, stunned and
enthralled by what he heard and saw; and, when they came to him, one said:
-Arme then your honor, if you do not want to get lost and that all this
insula miss!
"What do I have to arm myself," answered Sancho, "what do I know about weapons or
relief? It would be better to leave these things for my master Don Quixote, than in
two pallets will be dispatched and collected; that I, a sinner, went to God,
I do not understand anything in these hurries.
"Ah, Mr. Governor!" said another. How relevant is that? Arm yourself
Thank you, here we bring you offensive and defensive weapons , and go out to that
square, and be our guide and our captain, because by right it is your duty
be it, being our governor.
"Arm me not good," Sancho replied.
And at the moment they brought him two paves, which came supplied with them, and
they put on top of the shirt, without letting him take another dress, a pave
in front and another behind, and, through some concavities that they had made,
they put out their arms, and tied him very well with some cords, so that
was sandwiched and planked, straight as a spindle, unable to bend the
knees or wiggle a single step. They put a spear in his hands,
which approached to be able to stand up. When they had him like that,
They said to walk, and guide and encourage everyone; that, being his
north, its lanterna and its star, their business would have a good end.
-How am I to walk, unfortunate me -answered Sancho-, that I cannot
play the knee highs, because these tables prevent me
How sewn do I have with my meats? What they have to do is take me in
arms and stand, crossed or standing, on some shutter, that I
I will keep, either with this spear or with my body.
`` There, Senor Governor, '' said another, `` that more fear than the tables
they impede the passage; finish and wiggle, it's late, and the enemies grow, and
voices increase and danger burdens.
By whose persuasions and reproaches the poor governor tried to move, and
was hitting the ground with such a big blow that he thought he had
pieces. It remained as a tortoise enclosed and covered with its shells, or as
half bacon stuck between two troughs, or as well as a boat that overlooks the
through in the sand; and not because those mocking people saw him down
they had any compassion; before, extinguishing the torches, they returned to
reinforce the voices, and reiterate the weapon! with such great haste, passing by
above poor Sancho, giving him infinite stabs on the paves,
that if he didn't scoop up and cower, sticking his head between the
countries, the poor governor would have a very bad time, who, in that
tightness gathered, sweated and sweated, and wholeheartedly entrusted himself to
God that he would get him out of that danger.
Some stumbled on it, others fell, and so it was that a good
space, and from there, as from a watchtower, he ruled the armies,
great voices said:
"Here are our people, because this way the enemies carry more!" That
The gate is kept, that door is closed, those ladders are locked!
Piggy banks, fish and resin come in cauldrons of burning oil!
Block the streets with mattresses!
Anyway, he was naming all the trinkets and instruments with all his earnestness and
weapons of war with which the assault of a city is usually defended, and the
Molido Sancho, who listened to him and suffered everything, said among himself:
-Oh, if my Lord were served that this island would just be lost, and
Whether I saw myself either dead or was this great anguish!
Heaven heard his request, and when he least expected it, he heard voices that
they were saying:
-Vitoria, victory! The enemies are defeated! Hey, Mr. Governor,
stand up your grace and come to enjoy the expiration and distribute the
spoils that have been taken from enemies, for the courage of invincible
arm!
"Get me up," said the aching Sancho in a pained voice.
They helped him up, and, standing up, he said:
-The enemy that I have defeated I want to be nailed in the forehead. Me
I do not want to distribute the spoils of enemies, but to ask and plead with someone
friend, if I have him, give me a drink of wine, dry me off, and
Wipe off this sweat, I'll make myself water
They cleaned him, they brought him the wine, they slipped the pave, he sat on his
bed and fainted from fear, shock and work. I already weighed them
those of the mockery of having made it so heavy; but having come to
Sancho tempered them with the pain that their fainting spell had given them. Asked what time
It was, they replied that it was already dawn. He fell silent, and, without saying anything else, began
to get dressed, all buried in silence, and everyone looked at him and waited in
what was to stop the rush with which he dressed. He got dressed, in short, and little by
little, because he was ground and could not go much to much, he went to the
stable, followed by all who were there, and, reaching the
Rucio, hugged him and gave him a kiss of peace on the forehead, and, not without tears
in his eyes, he said:
-Come here, my companion and my friend, and helper of my work and
miseries: when I agreed with you and had no other thoughts than the
who gave me the care of mending your rigging and supporting
your corpezuelo, happy were my hours, my days and my years; but,
after I left you and climbed on the towers of ambition and
pride, a thousand miseries, a thousand jobs have entered my soul
and four thousand unrest.
And, insofar as he was saying these reasons, he was also saddling the
ass, without anyone telling him anything. Saddled, then, the red deer, with great
grief and sorrow rose upon him, and, directing his words and reasons to the
mayordomo, the secretary, the maestresala and Pedro Recio the doctor,
many others who were present there said:
"Make way, my lords, and let me return to my old freedom;
let me go look for the past life, so that it resuscitates me from this
present death. I was not born to be a governor, nor to defend islands
nor cities of the enemies that want to attack them. You better understand me
to plow and dig, prune and harden the vineyards, than to give laws or
defend provinces or kingdoms. Saint Peter is doing well in Rome: I want to
to say, how well each one is using the trade for which he was born.
A sickle in my hand is better for me than a governor's scepter; plus
I want to get fed up with gazpachos than to be subject to the misery of a doctor
impertinent that I starve myself; and more I want to lie in the shadow of
an oak in the summer and wrap myself with a coat of two hairs in the
winter, in my freedom, than to lie with the subjection of the government between
Dutch sheets and dressing in sable chives. Your mercedes se
stay with God, and tell the Duke my lord that, naked I was born, naked I
Hallo: I neither lose nor win; I mean, without white I entered this
government and without it I go out, quite the opposite of how the
governors of other islands. And stay away: let me go, I'm going to
bizmar; I think all my ribs are bruised, thanks to the
enemies who have walked over me tonight.
`` It must not be like that, Senor Governor, '' said Dr. Recio, `` I'll give you
at your mercy a drink against falls and grindings, which then returns
in its pristine strength and vigor; and, regarding food, I promise you
mercy to mend me, letting him eat abundantly of everything that
want.
-Afternoon piache! Sancho answered. So I will stop leaving as I will become Turkish.
There are these taunts for two times. By God so I stayed in this one, nor
admit another government, even if they gave me between two dishes, how to fly to the
sky without wings. I am of the lineage of the Panzas, who are all stubborn,
and if once they say odd, odd they must be, even if they are even, despite
all the world. Stay in this stable the wings of the ant, let me
they raised in the air for swifts and other birds to eat me, and
Let's go back to walking on the ground with flat feet, that, if they did not adorn
Cordoban chopped shoes, you will not lack rough rope espadrilles.
Each sheep with its partner, and no one tends more than the leg of what is
long the sheet; and let me pass, I'm late.
To which the butler said:
-Mr. Governor, we would gladly let go of your mercy, since
that we will be very sorry to lose him, that his wit and his Christian behavior
they force to desire him; but it is already known that every governor is obliged,
before he leaves the part where he has ruled, give first
residence: give it your mercy for the ten days that the
government, and go to the peace of God.
`` No one can ask me for it, '' answered Sancho, `` if he is not the one who will order the
duke my lord; I'm going to meet him, and I'll give it to him as a mold; how much
more than, when I go out naked, as I go out, there is no need for another sign to
to imply that I have ruled like an angel.
"Good heavens, the great Sancho is right," said Dr. Recio, "and that I am
it seems that we let him go, because the duke has to like infinite
see him.
They all came at it, and let him go, offering him company and
everything you want for the gift of your person and for the comfort
of your trip. Sancho said he didn't want more than a little barley for him.
black and half cheese and half bread for him; that, since the road was so short,
There was no need for more or better pastries. They all hugged him, and he,
crying, hugged everyone, and left them admired, both for their reasons and for
his determination so resolute and so discreet.
Chapter LIV. Which deals with things related to this story, and not another
some
The Duke and Duchess resolved that Don Quixote's challenge
to his vassal, for the aforementioned cause, come forward; and, since the
The waiter was in Flanders, where he had fled, because he did not
mother-in-law to Dona Rodríguez, they ordered a Gascon lackey to be put in her place,
His name was Tosilos, first industry him very well in everything that
had to do.
Two days from there the duke said to Don Quixote, as from there to four
His opposite would come, and he would appear in the field, armed as a knight,
and would sustain as the maiden lied for half of the beard, and even for all
the whole beard, if it was affirmed that he had given him word of
marriage. Don Quixote was delighted with the news of this kind, and
promised himself to work wonders in the case, and had great luck
having been offered an opportunity where those gentlemen could see how far
the courage of his mighty arm stretched; and so, with joy and contentment,
He waited the four days, which were being done to him, to the account of his desire,
four hundred centuries.
We let them pass ourselves, as we let other things pass, and we will
accompany Sancho, who between happy and sad came walking on the
Rucio to look for his master, whose company he liked more than being governor
of all the islands of the world.
It happened, then, that, not having elongated much of the insula of the su
government -that he never began to find out if it was an island, a city, a town or
place the one who ruled-, he saw that on the way he was going there were six
pilgrims with their staves, of these foreigners who ask for alms
singing, which, on reaching him, got on the wing, and, lifting
the voices all together, began to sing in their language what Sancho did not
could understand, if it was not a word that clearly pronounced alms,
whereby he understood that it was alms that they asked in their song; and like him,
According to Cide Hamete, he was also charitable, he took out of his saddlebags half
bread and a half cheese, of which he was supplied, and gave it to them, saying by signs
that he had nothing else to give them. They received it very gladly, and
they said:
-Guelte! Guelte!
"I don't understand," replied Sancho, "what you are asking of me, good people."
Then one of them took a bag from his breast and showed it to Sancho, for
where he understood that they were asking him for money; and he, putting his thumb on the
throat and reaching up, gave them to understand that he had no
ostugo of currency, and, biting the roe, broke for them; and, in passing,
having been looking at one of them very carefully, he lunged at him,
throwing his arms around her waist; in a loud and very Castilian voice, he said:
-God help me! What do I see? Is it possible that I hold in my arms
my dear friend, my good neighbor Sancho Panza? Yes I have, without a doubt, because
I neither sleep nor am I drunk now.
Sancho admired himself to see himself named by his name and to see himself embrace the
a pilgrim stranger, and after having looked at him without speaking
word, with much attention, could never know him; but, seeing his
suspension the pilgrim, said to him:
-How, and is it possible, Sancho Panza brother, that you don't know your neighbor
Ricote the Moorish, grocer of your place?
Then Sancho looked at him more closely and began to figure him out, and,
Finally, he came to know him at every point, and, without getting off the donkey, he
threw his arms around his neck, and said:
-Who the hell would have known you, Ricote, in that moharracho suit that
do you bring Tell me: who has made you franchote, and how dare you
Go back to Spain, where if they catch you and they know you will have a bad luck?
"If you don't discover me, Sancho," replied the pilgrim, "I'm sure
in this suit there will be no one who knows me; and let's get out of the way
that mall that seems there, where my friends want to eat and rest.
companions, and there you will eat with them, who are very peaceful people. I will have
instead of telling you what has happened to me after I left our
instead, by obeying the party of His Majesty, who with such rigor to the
wretches of my nation threatened, as you heard.
Sancho did so, and, Ricote speaking to the other pilgrims, they left
to the avenue that looked like, well deviated from the royal road. They threw the
staffs, they took off their mucetas or capes and were in a ball, and all
they were young and very gentlemen, except Ricote, who was already a man
advanced in years. They all had saddlebags, and all, it seemed, were good
provided, at least, with things that are inciting and that call for the thirst of two
leagues.
They stretched out on the ground, and, making tablecloths from the herbs, put on
they bread, salt, knives, nuts, slices of cheese, raw ham bones,
that if they did not allow themselves to be chewed, they did not defend being sucked. They put
also a black delicacy that they say is called cavial, and is made of
fish eggs, great alarm clock for the collapse. There was no lack of olives,
although dry and without any marinade, but tasty and entertaining. But what
The most that were found in the field of that banquet were six boots of wine, which
each one took his own from his saddlebag; even good old Ricote, who had
transformed from Moorish to German or Tudesco, he took his own, which in
greatness could compete with five.
They began to eat with great taste and space, savoring each other with
each bite, which they took with the tip of the knife, and very little
each thing, and then, immediately, all as one, raised their arms and
boots in the air; put their mouths in his mouth, staring at him
heaven, it seemed only that they were aiming at him; and in this way,
shaking their heads from side to side, signs that proved the taste
that they received, they were a good space, racking in their stomachs
the entrails of the vessels.
Sancho looked at everything, and he didn't hurt at all; before, for complying with
the saying, which he knew very well, of "when you go to Rome, do as
you see, "he asked Ricote for the boot, and took his aim like the others, and not
with less taste than they.
Four times the boots resulted in being steep; but the fifth no
it was possible, because they were already skinnier and drier than esparto grass, which
the joy they had shown up to that point withered. Occasionally,
someone joined his right hand with Sancho's, and said:
-Spanish and tudesqui, tuto uno: bon compaño.
And Sancho answered: Bon compaño, swear Di!
And he would shoot with a laugh that lasted an hour, without remembering then
nothing of what had happened to him in his government; because about the time and
time when you eat and drink, little jurisdiction usually take care.
Finally, running out of wine was the beginning of a dream that gave
all, falling asleep on the same tables and tablecloths; Ricote alone
and Sancho remained alert, because they had eaten more and drunk less; and,
Pushing Ricote away from Sancho, they sat at the foot of a beech tree, leaving the
pilgrims buried in sweet sleep; and Ricote, without tripping anything in his
Moorish language, in pure Castilian, he told the following reasons:
- «You know well, oh Sancho Panza, my neighbor and friend!
that His Majesty had published against those of my nation put terror and
fright in all of us; at least, in me it made him lucky that
It seems that before the time we were given to do
absence of Spain, I already had the rigor of the sentence executed in my person and
in that of my children. I therefore ordered, in my opinion as prudent, as well as
the one who knows that for such a long time they will take away the house where he lives and
provides another where to move; I ordered, I mean, to go out alone, without me
family, from my town, and go find where to take her comfortably and without
rush with which the others left; because well I saw, and they saw all our
old men, that those cries were not just threats, as some said,
but true laws, which had to be put into effect at their determined
weather; and forced me to believe this truth, I know the mean and crazy
attempts that ours had, and such, that it seems to me was
divine inspiration which moved His Majesty to put into effect so
gallant resolution, not because we were all blamed, that some had
firm and true Christians; but they were so few that they could not oppose
to those who were not, and it was not good to raise the serpent in the womb, having
enemies inside the house. Finally, with good reason we were punished
with the penalty of exile, soft and smooth apparently of some, but at the same time
ours, the most terrible that could be given to us. Wherever we are
We cry for Spain, which, in short, we were born in it and it is our homeland
natural; nowhere do we find the welcome that our misfortune
wishes, and in Barbary, and in all parts of Africa, where we hoped
be welcomed, welcomed and given away, that is where we are most offended and
they mistreat. We have not known good until we have lost it; and it is the
I wish so great, that almost all of us have to return to Spain, that more than
Those, and there are many, who know the language as I do, turn to it, and
they leave their wives and children helpless there: so much is the love that the
have; and now I know and experience what is often said: that the
love of the country. I left, as I say, our town, I entered France, and,
Although they welcomed us there, I wanted to see everything. I went to Italy and
I came to Germany, and there it seemed to me that it was possible to live with more freedom,
because its inhabitants do not look at many delicacies: each one lives as
want, because in most of it you live with freedom of conscience.
I left taken home in a town next to Augusta; join me with these
pilgrims, who have the habit of coming to Spain many of them, each
year, to visit the della sanctuaries, which have them for their Indies, and for
very certain farming and well-known profit. Andanla almost all, and there is no town
none where they do not come out eaten and drunk, as they say, and with a
real, at least, in money, and at the end of their trip they leave with more than a hundred
spare shields that, exchanged in gold, or already in the hollow of the staves, or
Between the patches of the capes, or with the industry that they can,
They take them out of the kingdom and pass them to their lands, despite the guards of
the posts and ports where they are registered. Now it is my intention, Sancho,
remove the treasure that I left buried, that because it is out of town I will be able to
do without danger and write or pass from Valencia to my daughter and my wife,
that I know is in Algiers, and trace how to bring them to some port of
France, and from there take them to Germany, where we will wait for what God
I want to do us; that, in resolution, Sancho, I know for sure that the
Ricota my daughter and Francisca Ricota, my wife, are Christian Catholics, and,
Although I am not so much, I still have more of a Christian than a Moorish, and
I always pray to God to open my eyes of understanding and make me known
how I have to serve you. And what has me admired is not knowing why I know
My wife and daughter went to Barbary before than to France, where I could live
as a Christian. "
To which Sancho replied:
-Look, Ricote, that shouldn't have been in your hand, because Juan took them
Tiopieyo, your wife's brother; and, as he must be fine Moorish, he went to the
rather stopped, and I know how to say something else: that I think you are going in vain to look for
what you left locked up; because we had news that they had taken from you
brother-in-law and your wife many pearls and a lot of money in gold that they carried for
to register.
That may well be, replied Ricote, but I know, Sancho, that they didn't touch
my confinement, because I did not discover where I was, afraid of some
outrage; And so, if you, Sancho, want to come with me and help me get it out and
to cover it up, I will give you two hundred shields, with which you can remedy your
needs, that you already know that I know that you have many.
"I would," answered Sancho, "but I'm not greedy at all; what, to
be, a trade I left this morning from the hands, where I could do the
walls of my house of gold, and eat within six months on silver plates;
and, as well for this as it seems to me, I would betray my king in giving favor to
his enemies, it was not with you, if as you promise me two hundred shields, I
you will count four hundred here.
"And what kind of job have you left, Sancho?" Ricote asked.
`` I have ceased to be governor of an island, '' answered Sancho, `` and such that
good fee that they do not find another like her at three pulls.
-And where is that island? Ricote asked.
-Where to? Sancho answered. Two leagues from here, and it's called the insula
Barataria.
"Hush, Sancho," said Ricote, "the islands are there in the sea;
that there are no islands on the mainland.
-How not? Sancho replied. Tell you, Ricote friend, that this morning I split
della, and yesterday I was in it ruling at my pleasure, like a Sagittarius;
but, with all that, I have left it, because it seems to me that the
governors.
-And what have you gained in government? Ricote asked.
"I have gained," answered Sancho, "having known that I am not good at
rule, if it is not a herd of cattle, and that the riches
such governments are at the cost of losing rest and sleep, and even the
support; because in the islands the governors must eat little,
especially if they have doctors who look out for their health.
`` I don't understand you, Sancho, '' said Ricote, `` but it seems to me that everything
you say is nonsense; What, who was to give you insulas that
you govern? Was there a lack of men in the world more skilled for governors than
you are? Shut up, Sancho, and come back to yourself, and see if you want to come with me,
as I have told you, to help me remove the treasure that I left hidden; what in
It is true that it is so much that it can be called a treasure, and I will give you that you live,
like I told you.
"I have already told you, Ricote," replied Sancho, "that I don't want to;" be satisfied that for
you will not be discovered, and continue on your way in good time, and leave me
follow mine; that I know that what is well earned is lost, and what is bad, it and its
owner.
"I don't want to be persistent, Sancho," said Ricote, "but tell me: did you find yourself in our
Instead, when did my wife, my daughter and my brother-in-law leave him?
`` Yes, I found it, '' answered Sancho, `` and I can tell you that your daughter came out so beautiful.
everyone in town came out to see her, and they all said it was the
most beautiful creature in the world. She was crying and hugging all her friends and
known, and all who came to see her, and all asked to entrust her to
God and Our Lady his mother; and this, with so much feeling, that to me
It made me cry, that I am not usually very crying. And at the fee that many had
desire to hide it and go out to take it off on the way; but the fear of going
against the king's command he stopped them. Mainly showed more
passionate Don Pedro Gregorio, that rich young man you know,
who say he loved her very much, and after she left, he never again
has seemed in our place, and we all thought she was going after her to
steal it; but so far nothing has been known.
`` I always had a bad suspicion, '' said Ricote, `` that this gentleman was
my daughter; but, trusting in the value of my Ricotta, I was never saddened by the
know that he loved her well; that you've already heard, Sancho, that the
Moors few or no times mixed for love with old Christians,
and my daughter, who, to what I believe, tended to be more Christian than
in love, she would not be cured of the requests of that senor mayorazgo.
"God do it," Sancho replied, "it would be bad for both of them." And let me
from here, Ricote friend, I want to get tonight where my
Mr. Don Quixote.
-God go with you, Sancho brother, that my companions are already rebellious, and
It is also time that we continue on our way.
And then the two of them embraced, and Sancho got on his black, and Ricote
He leaned close to his staff, and they parted.
Chapter LV. Of things that happened to Sancho on the way, and others that there are not
more to see
The fact that Sancho stopped with Ricote did not mean that that day
reached the castle of the duke, since it reached half a league from him, where he
took the night, something dark and closed; but, as it was summer, he did not
much regret; and thus, he moved out of the way with the intention of waiting for the
morning; and wanted his short and unfortunate luck that, looking for a place where
better to settle in, he and the rook fell into a deep and very shallow chasm that
between some very old buildings it was, and at the time of falling, it was
commended God with all his heart, thinking that he would not stop until the
deep from the abyss. And it was not like that, because a little more than three states
the rodent hit bottom, and he found himself on top of it, without having received injury or
any damage.
He tempted his whole body, and caught his breath, to see if he was healthy or
leaky somewhere; and, looking good, whole and catholic in health,
He did not get tired of thanking God Our Lord for the mercy that he had
done, because no doubt he thought he was in a thousand pieces. Also tempted
with his hands on the walls of the chasm, to see if it would be possible to get out
della without anyone's help; but he found all of them flat and without any hold,
of which Sancho was very distressed, especially when he heard that the
he complained tenderly and painfully; and it was not much, nor did he complain of vice,
that, in truth, he was not very well stopped.
"Oh," said Sancho Panza then, "and how unthinkable events are often
happen at every turn to those who live in this miserable world! Who would say
that the one who yesterday was enthroned governor of an island, commanding his
servants and their vassals, today had to be seen buried in a chasm, without
There should be someone to remedy him, neither a servant nor a vassal who comes to his
Help? Here we will starve myself and my donkey, if we no longer
we died before, he of crushed and broken, and I of sorrowful. At least not
I will be as fortunate as my lord Don Quixote de la Mancha was when
descended and went down to the cave of that enchanted Montesinos, where he found who
gave him a better gift than at home, which seems only to have gone to the table
put to bed already made. There he saw beautiful and peaceful visions, and I will see
here, to what I believe, toads and snakes. Woe to me, and what have they
stopped my follies and fantasies! From here they will take my bones, when the sky
let them discover me, cute, white and threadbare, and those of my good
rucio with them, where perhaps you will see who we are, at least
of those who have news that Sancho Panza never left his donkey, nor
his donkey from Sancho Panza. Again I say: wretched of us, who has not
dear our short luck that we died in our homeland and among the
ours, where since our misfortune will not find a remedy, there will be no
whoever hurt from it, and in the last hour of our passing we
close your eyes! Oh companion and friend of mine, what a bad payment I have given you for your
good services! Forgive me and ask fortune, in the best way that
You know, let him get us out of this miserable job we're in for
two; that I promise to put a laurel wreath on your head, not
look like but a poet laureate, and give you the doubled feed.
Sancho Panza lamented in this way, and his donkey listened to him without
answer him a word: such was the predicament and anguish in which the poor
It was. Finally, having spent all that night in miserable
complaints and lamentations, the day came, with whose clarity and brilliance he saw
Sancho that it was impossible of all impossibility to get out of that well without being
helped, and began to lament and shout, to see if anyone heard him; but
all their voices were given in the desert, because by all those contours
there was no person who could listen to him, and then
dead.
The red was face up, and Sancho Panza accommodated him so that he
standing, which could hardly be had; and, taking out of the saddlebags, that also
had made the very fortune of the fall, a piece of bread, he gave to his
Donkey, who did not taste bad, and Sancho said to him, as if he understood:
-All duels with bread are good.
In this, he discovered on one side of the chasm a hole, capable of fitting through it
a person, if he was overwhelmed and shrunk. Sancho Panza came to him, and,
crouching down, he stepped inside and saw that inside it was spacious and
long, and I could see it, because from what could be called a ceiling
ray of sun that discovered everything. He also saw that it stretched and lengthened
by another spacious concavity; seeing which, he went back to where he was
the donkey, and with a stone he began to crumble the earth from the hole,
so that in a small space he made a place where the
ass, as he did; and, taking him by the halter, began to walk along
that grotto ahead, to see if there was any way out elsewhere. TO
Sometimes I went to darkness, and sometimes without light, but never without fear.
-Good almighty God! she said to each other. This one that for me is
misadventure, better off for my master don Quixote's adventure. He yes that
had these depths and dungeons by flowery gardens and by
Galiana's palaces, and hope to get out of this darkness and narrowness to
some flowery meadow; but I, without luck, lacking advice and undermined
of mind, at every step I think that suddenly underfoot has to be
open another chasm deeper than the other, which I just swallowed. Well
Come wrong, if you come alone!
In this way and with these thoughts it seemed to him that he had walked little
more than half a league, after which he discovered a confused clarity, which
It seemed to be already daylight, and that somewhere it was entering, which gave an indication of
have an open end that, for him, the path of the other life.
Here Cide Hamete Benengeli leaves him, and goes back to dealing with Don Quixote,
who, exulted and happy, awaited the term of the battle that was to
do with the robber of the honor of the daughter of Doña Rodríguez, whom
He was thinking of straightening the one-eyed man and the mess that badly had an effect on him.
It happened, then, that, going out one morning to impose and rehearse in what
had to do in the trance in which another day he thought to see himself, giving a repel
or attacked Rocinante, came to put his feet so close to a cave,
that, unless the reins were pulled strongly, it would be impossible not to fall into it.
Anyway, he stopped him and did not fall, and, getting a little closer, without alighting,
looked at that depth; and, looking at her, she heard great voices within; and,
listening carefully, he was able to perceive and understand that the one who gave them said:
-Oh upstairs! Is there a Christian who listens to me, or a gentleman
charitable who grieve for a sinner buried in life, or a wretched
ungoverned governor?
It seemed to Don Quixote that he heard the voice of Sancho Panza, that he
suspense and astonishment, and, raising his voice as much as he could, he said:
-Who's down there? Who is complaining?
"Who can be here, or who is to complain," they replied, "if not the
sancho Panza, governor, for his sins and for his bad
wandering, of the Barataria island, a squire that belonged to the famous knight Don
Quixote of La Mancha?
Hearing what Don Quixote did, his admiration doubled and his
astonishment, coming to the thought that Sancho Panza must be dead, and
who was there grieving his soul, and led to this imagination he said:
-Conjure you for all that I can conjure you as a Christian Catholic,
tell me who you are; and if you are a lost soul, tell me what you want me to do
by you; that, well, it is my profession to favor and run to the needy
of this world, I will also be to run and help the needy of the
another world, that they cannot help themselves.
`` In that way, '' they replied, `` your grace who speaks to me must be my
Mr. Don Quixote de la Mancha, and even in the organ of the voice there is no other,
definitely.
`` I am Don Quixote, '' replied Don Quixote, `` the one who professes to help and help in
their needs to the living and the dead. So tell me who you are, what
you have me stunned; because if you are my squire Sancho Panza, and you have
dead, as the devils have not taken you, and, by the mercy of
God, you are in purgatory, suffrages our Holy Mother has the
Roman Catholic Church enough to get you out of the pain you are in, and
I, who will request it with her, for my part, with how much my finances
I will reach; So just come out and tell me who you are.
-I vote so! they answered, and by the birth of whom
I wish, I swear, Mr. Don Quixote de la Mancha, that I am your squire
Sancho Panza, and that I have never died in all the days of my life; otherwise
that, having left my government for things and causes that need more
space to say them, last night I fell into this chasm where I lay, the rucio
with me, who will not let me lie, because, by more signs, he is here with me.
And there is more: that it seems only that the donkey understood what Sancho said,
because at the moment he began to bray, so loud, that the whole cave
rumbled.
-Famous witness! said Don Quixote. The bray I know as if you
I give birth, and I hear your voice, my Sancho. Wait for me; I'll go to the duke's castle
that is near here, and I will bring whoever will take you out of this chasm, where your sins
they must have put you on.
"What a grace," said Sancho, "and come back quickly, by one God alone, who
I can't bear it being here buried alive, and I'm dying of
afraid.
Don Quixote left him, and went to the castle to tell the dukes about the event of
Sancho Panza, that they marveled not a little, although they well understood that
it must have fallen due to the correspondence of that cave that from times
immemorial it was there made; but they couldn't think how he had left the
government without them having notice of his coming. Finally, as they say,
they carried ropes and ropes; and, at the cost of many people and a lot of work,
they took the rook and Sancho Panza out of that darkness into the sunlight.
Rape a student, and said:
-In this way all the bad ones had to leave their governments
governors, how does this sinner emerge from the depths of the abyss: dead of
hungry, discolored, and without white, to what I believe.
Sancho heard him, and said:
-Eight days or ten ha, murmuring brother, that I entered to rule the island
that they gave me, in which I was not fed up with bread for even an hour; on
they have persecuted me doctors, and enemies have overwhelmed me the geese; neither
I have taken the place of bribing, or collecting fees; and, being this
Well, as it is, I did not deserve, in my opinion, to leave this way; but
man puts and God disposes, and God knows the best and what is good for
each; and what the weather, such the temptation; and no one says "this water does not
I will drink, "that where you think there are bacon, there are no stakes; and God
understand, and that's enough, and I won't say more, even if I could.
-Don't be angry, Sancho, or feel sorry for what you hear, it will be
never finish: you come with a sure conscience, and say what they say; And it is
wanting to tie the tongues of the cursing the same as wanting to put
gates to the field. If the governor comes out of his government rich, they say of him that
He has been a thief, and if he comes out poor, it has been a little and a
goofy.
`` Surely, '' answered Sancho, `` they will have me this time first.
for a fool than for a thief.
In these talks they arrived, surrounded by boys and many other people, to the
castle, where in some corridors the Duke and Duchess were already
waiting for Don Quixote and Sancho, who did not want to go up to see the Duke
without first not having accommodated the rook in the stable, because
He said that he had had a very bad night at the inn; and then went up to see
his lords, before whom, kneeling, said:
-I, gentlemen, because your greatness wanted it that way, without any merit
mine, I went to govern your Barataria island, in which I entered naked, and
I am naked: I neither lose nor win. Whether I have ruled good or bad, witnesses
I have had in front of them, they will say what they want. I have declared doubts,
sentenced lawsuits, always starving, for having wanted it that way the
Dr. Pedro Recio, a native of Tirteafuera, an island doctor and
governor. Enemies attacked us at night, and, having
great trouble, say those of the island who came out free and with victory
for the value of my arm, may God give them such health as they say
truth. In resolution, in this time I have felt the burdens that it brings
with himself, and obligations, governing, and I have found on my own that no
They can be carried by my shoulders, nor are they the weight of my ribs, nor arrows of
my quiver; and so, before the government came across me, I wanted
I find the government through, and yesterday morning I left the island as the
I found: with the same streets, houses and roofs that I had when I entered
she. I have not borrowed from anyone, or got involved in farms; and, although
I was thinking of doing some helpful ordinances, I didn't do any, afraid that
They were not to be kept: which is the same thing to do than not to do them. I left,
As I say, from the island with no other accompaniment than that of my rucio; I fell into
a chasm, come to me for it forward, until, this morning, with the light of the
sun, I saw the exit, but not so easy that, not to have heaven in store for me
Mr. Don Quixote, I'll stay there until the end of the world. So my
Duke and Duchess, here is your Governor Sancho Panza, who has
harvested in just ten days that the government has had to know that it does not
has to give him anything for being governor, not that of an island, but of the whole
world; and, with this budget, kissing your mercedes feet,
imitating the game of the boys, who say "You jump, and you give it to me", I give
a jump from the government, and I am at the service of my lord Don Quixote; that,
in short, in him, although I eat bread with a start, at least make me feel
For me, as I am fed up, that makes me use carrots rather than
partridges.
With this, Sancho ended his long talk, always fearing Don Quixote
that he had to say thousands of nonsense in it; and when he saw him finish
with so few, gave in his heart thanks to heaven, and the duke embraced
Sancho, and told him that it weighed on his soul that he had left so quickly
government; but that he would be lucky to be given another in his state
a less burdensome and profitable job. The duchess embraced him likewise, and
He ordered that they give him gifts, because he gave signs of coming badly ground and worse
stopped.
Chapter LVI. Of the huge and never seen battle that happened between Don
Quixote de la Mancha and the lackey Tosilos, in defense of the daughter of
owner doña Rodríguez
The dukes were not sorry for the mockery made to Sancho Panza of the
government they gave him; and more, that that same day their butler came, and
He counted point by point, almost all of them, the words and actions that Sancho had
said and done in those days, and finally made the assault of the
insula, and Sancho's fear, and his departure, that no small taste
received.
After that, tell the story that the day of the battle arrived
postponed, and, the duke having once and very many times warned his lackey
Tosilos how he had to agree with Don Quixote to defeat him without killing him
nor wound him, he ordered the irons to be removed from the spears, saying to Don
Quixote who did not allow Christianity, that he prided himself, that that
battle was with so much risk and danger of lives, and that he be content
with which he gave him a free field in his land, since it was against the decree
of the Holy Council, which prohibits such challenges, and would not want to
by all rigor that strong trance.
Don Quixote said that His Excellency would arrange the things of that business
as more was served; that he would obey her in everything. Arrived, then,
fearful day, and the duke having commanded that in front of the plaza del
castle would become a spacious corpse, where the judges of the
field and the owners, mother and daughter, plaintiffs, had come from all
surrounding places and villages infinite people, to see the novelty of that
battle; that they had never seen or heard of another such
land those who lived and those who had died.
The first to enter the field and lurch was the master of the
ceremonies, who felt the field, and walked everything, because there was no
some deception, or concealed thing where he stumbled and fell; later
the dueñas entered and sat in their seats, covered with the cloaks
up to the eyes and even up to the breasts, with signs of no small
feeling. Present Don Quixote in the lurch, from there to little,
accompanied by many trumpets, he appeared in a part of the square, on a
mighty horse, sinking it all, the great lackey Tosilos,
visor and all flustered, with strong and shining weapons. Horse
it was shown to be Frisian, broad and of a pale color; of each hand and foot
hung an arroba of wool.
The brave combatant, well informed of the Duke his lord, came
had to bear with the courageous Don Quixote de la Mancha, warned that in
in no way killed him, but tried to flee the first encounter by
excuse the danger of his death, which was true if he
be found. He walked the square, and, arriving where the owners were, he
some time to look at the one that she asked for her husband. The field master called
Don Quixote, who had already appeared in the plaza, and together with Tosilos
He spoke to the owners, asking if they would allow him to come back for his
Don Quixote de la Mancha right. They said yes, and that everything
In that case, they took it for granted, as firm and valid.
Already at this time the Duke and Duchess were placed in a gallery that
fell on the stockade, all of which was crowned with infinite people, who
I expected to see the rigorous trance never seen. It was a condition of the
combatants that if Don Quixote won, his opposite would marry
the daughter of Doña Rodríguez; and if he were defeated, his
contender for the word that was asked of him, without giving any other satisfaction whatsoever.
The master of ceremonies split the sun for them, and set the two of them each
the position where they were to be. The drums sounded, the air filled the
sound of trumpets, the earth trembled underfoot; They were
the hearts of the gazing mob suspended, fearing some and hoping
others the good or bad event of that case. Finally, Don Quixote,
entrusting himself with all his heart to God Our Lord and to the lady
Dulcinea del Toboso, was waiting to be given a precise signal of the
onset; However, our lackey had different thoughts: no
He thought but what I will say now:
It seems that when he was looking at his enemy, it seemed the most
beautiful woman he had seen in all his life, and the blind child,
who ordinarily call Love on those streets, did not want to lose the
opportunity offered him to triumph over a lackey soul and put it in the
list of your trophies; and thus, reaching him beautifully, without anyone
see, he sent the poor footman a two-rod arrow down the side
left, and passed her heart from part to part; and I can do good to
sure, because Love is invisible, and it enters and leaves as it wishes, without
no one asks him to account for his deeds.
I say, then, that when they gave the signal of the attack, it was our
transported footman, thinking of the beauty of which he had already made
lady of her freedom, and thus, she did not heed the sound of the trumpet, as she did
Don Quixote, who had barely heard her, when he attacked, and, to the whole
running that allowed Rocinante, he set out against his enemy; and, watching him leave
his good squire Sancho, said loudly:
-God guide you, cream and flower of the errant knights! God give you the
vitoria, because you have reason on your part!
And although Tosilos saw Don Quixote coming against him, he did not move a
your position; earlier, with loud voices, he called to the field master, who
come to see what he wanted, he said:
-Sir, is this battle not done because I marry, or do not marry, with
That woman?
"Yes," he was answered.
`` Well, '' said the footman, `` I am afraid of my conscience, and I would put it in
great charge if he passed forward in this battle; and so, I say that I give myself
I give up and that I want to marry that lady later.
The field master was amazed at Tosilos's reasons; and how was one
of the experts of the machine in that case, he did not know how to answer a word.
Don Quixote stopped in the middle of his career, seeing that his enemy
attacked him. The duke did not know the occasion because he did not go ahead in
the battle, but the field master went to declare what Tosilos said,
of which he was suspended and angry in extreme.
While this was happening, Tosilos came to where Dona Rodríguez was, and
he said loudly:
-I, madam, I want to marry your daughter, and I do not want to reach for
lawsuits or disputes what I can achieve by peace and without danger of
death.
The brave Don Quixote heard this, and said:
-Well, this is so, I am free and loose from my promise: get married on time
good, and, since our Lord God gave it to you, Saint Peter bless you.
The duke had gone down to the castle square, and, reaching Tosilos, he
said:
`` Is it true, sir, that you give up, and that, instigated by
your fearful conscience, do you want to marry this maiden?
"Yes, sir," Tosilos replied.
"He does very well," Sancho Panza said at this time, "because what you have to
give it to the mur, give it to the cat, and take care of you.
Tosilos was leaving, unlacing his hat, and begged to be helped quickly,
because he was lacking the spirits of his breath, and he could not see
locked so long in the narrowness of that room. They took it away
he hurries, and his lackey face was exposed and evident. Seeing which
Dona Rodríguez and her daughter, shouting loudly, said:
"This is deception, this is deception!" To Tosilos, the lackey of the duke my lord,
they have put us in the place of my real husband! Justice of God and of
King, of so much malice, not to say mischief!
`` Don't you go, ladies, '' said Don Quixote, `` that neither is malice nor is it
bellaquería; and if it is, and it was not the cause of the duke, but the bad
enchanters who chase me, which, inviting me to reach
the glory of this expiration, they have turned your husband's face into
the one you say is the Duke's lackey. Take my advice, and despite
from the malice of my enemies, marry him, who is undoubtedly the same as
you want to reach for husband.
The duke, who heard this, was about to burst into laughter all his anger, and said:
-The things that happen to Don Quixote are so extraordinary that
I am about to believe that this my lackey is not; But let's use this ruse and
skill: let's delay the wedding for fifteen days, if you want, and keep
to this character who has us doubtful, in which it could be that
return to his pristine figure; that rancor should not last so long that
charming have Mr. Don Quixote, and more, leaving them so little to use
these charms and transformations.
-Oh Lord! -said Sancho-, that they already have these miscreants by use and
habit of changing things, from one to another, that touches my master. A
knight who overcame the days gone by, called the one of the Mirrors,
returned in the figure of the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, a native of our
people and great friend of ours, and my lady Dulcinea del Toboso has
turned into a rustic farmhouse; And so I imagine this lackey has to die
and live lackey every day of your life.
To which Rodríguez's daughter said:
-Whoever this is who asks me for a wife, I thank him; that
more I want to be a legitimate woman of a lackey than not a friend and mocked by a
gentleman, since the one who mocked me is not.
In resolution, all these stories and events stopped Tosilos
pick up, until you see where your transformation stops; all cheered the
victory for Don Quixote, and the most were sad and melancholic to see
that the long-awaited combatants had not been shattered, well so
as the mochachos are sad when the hanged man they expect does not come out,
because he has forgiven, or part, or justice. Were the people,
The duke and Don Quixote returned to the castle, they locked up Tosilos,
Doña Rodríguez and her daughter were very happy to see that, by one way or another
on the other hand, that case had to stop in marriage, and Tosilos did not expect
less.
Chapter LVII. Which is about how Don Quixote said goodbye to the Duke, and what
that happened to the discreet and outspoken Altisidora, maiden of the
duchess
It already seemed to Don Quixote that it was good to get out of such idleness as
that in that castle he had; that he imagined the lack of his
person did in letting himself be locked up and lazy among the infinite
gifts and delights that those gentlemen gave him like a knight errant,
and it seemed to him that he had to give a close account to heaven of that idleness
and confinement; and thus, one day he asked the dukes for leave to leave.
They gave it to them, with signs that it greatly weighed them that the
leave. The duchess gave his wife's letters to Sancho Panza, who wept
with them, and said:
-Who would think that hopes as great as those in my chest
woman Teresa Panza engendered the news of my government had to stop in
I turn now to the dragged adventures of my master Don Quixote de la
Stain? With all this, I am happy to see that my Teresa corresponded to be
who is it, sending the acorns to the duchess; that, unless they were sent to you,
leaving me regretful, she will show me ungrateful. What consoles me is
that this gift cannot be called a bribe, because I already had the
government when she sent them, and it is reasoned that those who receive
some benefit, even with childish things, be grateful. On
Indeed, I entered the government naked and left the government naked; and so, I can
to say with a sure conscience, which is not a little: "Naked I was born, naked I was
Hallo: I neither lose nor win ".
This happened with Sancho on the day of departure; and, leaving Don Quixote,
having said goodbye the night before to the dukes, one morning
armed in the castle square. All the people looked at him from the corridors
of the castle, and likewise the dukes came out to see him. Sancho was on
his gray, with his saddlebags, suitcase and spare part, very happy, because the
The duke's butler, the one who was Trifaldi, had given him a pouch with
two hundred gold shields, to supply the necessities of the road, and this still
Don Quixote did not know.
Being, as has been said, everyone looking at him, at the wrong time, among the others
mistresses and maids of the duchess, who were looking at him, raised her voice
outspoken and discreet Altisidora, and pitifully said:
-Listen, bad gentleman;
hold the reins a little;
do not fatigue the flanks
of your badly ruled beast.
Look, fake, don't run away
of some fierce snake,
but of a lamb
which is far from sheep.
You have mocked, horrendous monster,
the most beautiful maiden
that Dïana saw in her mountains,
that Venus looked in her jungles.
Cruel Vireno, fugitive Aeneas,
Barabbas accompany you; there you come.
You carry, carry impious!
in the clutches of your locks
the entrails of a humble one,
as in love, tender.
You took three dressers,
and some garters, some legs
that are equal to pure marble
in plain, white and black.
You took two thousand sighs,
that, being made of fire, could
scorch two thousand Troy,
if there were two thousand Troyas.
Cruel Vireno, fugitive Aeneas,
Barabbas accompany you; there you come.
Of that Sancho, your squire,
the insides are so stubborn
and so hard, that it does not come out
of her Dulcinea charm.
Of the guilt that you have
bear the sad sorrow;
that righteous for sinners
maybe they pay in my land.
Your finest adventures
in misadventures they turn,
in dreams your hobbies,
forgetting your firmness.
Cruel Vireno, fugitive Aeneas,
Barabbas accompany you; there you come.
You are considered false
from Seville to Marchena,
from Granada to Loja,
from London to England.
If you play the kingship
the hundreds, or the first,
kings flee from you;
aces or sevens do not see.
If you cut your corns,
blood the wounds pour,
and stay the raigones
if you remove your teeth.
Cruel Vireno, fugitive Aeneas,
Barabbas accompany you; there you come.
While, of the luck that has been said, the injured complained
Altisidora, Don Quixote looked at her, and, without answering her a word,
turning his face to Sancho, he said:
-For the century of your past, my Sancho, I conjure you to tell me one
truth. Tell me, are you by any chance wearing the three dressers and the garters that are
in love maiden says?
To which Sancho replied:
-I do carry the three dressing tables; but the leagues, as in the hills of Úbeda.
The Duchess was left admired by Altisidora's self-assurance, who, although the
she thought she was daring, graceful, and outgoing, not to the degree that she dared to
such unfoldments; and, as this mockery was not noticed, he grew
plus your admiration. The duke wanted to reinforce the grace, and said:
-It does not seem right to me, sir gentleman, that, having received in this my
castle the good reception that has been made to you, have you dared to
take three dressers, at least, if at most my garters
maid; signs are of bad breast and samples that do not correspond to
your fame. Give him back the garters; if not, I challenge you to a deadly battle,
without being afraid that charming miscreants will turn me back or change their faces,
as my lackey has done in Tosilos, the one who went into battle with you.
`` God forbid, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that I should draw my sword against
your most illustrious person, from whom I have received so many favors; the
Dressing tables I will return, because Sancho says he has them; the leagues is
impossible, because neither I have received them nor he; and if it's yours
maiden would like to look at her hiding places, surely she will find them. Me,
Mr. Duke, I have never been a thief, nor do I think I will be in all my life, as
God don't leave me out of your hand. This maiden speaks, as she says, as
in love, for which I am not to blame; and so, I have nothing to ask of him
sorry neither to her nor to Your Excellency, whom I beg please consider me better
opinion, and give me a license to go my way again.
`` God give you so good, '' said the Duchess, `` Mr. Don Quixote, that you always
let us hear good news of your misdeeds. And walk with God; that,
the more you stop, the more you increase the fire in the breasts of the
maidens who look at you; I'll punish mine so that from here
Go ahead, don't get out of hand with your eyes or words.
"I just want you to listen to me, oh brave Don Quixote!" -said
then Altisidora-; and I beg your forgiveness for the robbery of the leagues,
because, in God and in my soul that I have them on, and I have fallen into the
carelessness of the one who, going on the ass, was looking for him.
-Didn't I say so? Sancho said. Nice am I to cover up thefts! Then,
To want to do them, the opportunity had come for me in my government.
Don Quixote lowered his head and bowed to the dukes and all the
bystanders, and, turning the reins to Rocinante, followed by Sancho
on the rucio, he left the castle, straightening his way to Zaragoza.
Chapter LVIII. Which is about how they mentioned Don Quixote Adventures
so many, that they did not let each other wander
When Don Quixote found himself in the campaign flat, free and freed from the
Altisidora's congratulations, it seemed to him that he was at its center, and that the
spirits were renewed to continue again the assumption of their
knights, and, turning to Sancho, said:
-Freedom, Sancho, is one of the most precious gifts that men
gave the heavens; the treasures contained in the
neither land nor sea conceals; For freedom, as well as for honor, you can
and must venture life, and, on the contrary, captivity is the greatest
evil that can come to men. I say this, Sancho, because you have seen well
the gift, the abundance that we have had in this castle that we left;
for at the end of those seasoned banquets and those drinks of
snow, it seemed to me that I was stuck between the narrow
hunger, because I did not enjoy it with the freedom that I would enjoy if they were mine;
that the obligations of the rewards of benefits and grants
Recebidas are ties that do not allow the free spirit to roam. Happy
the one to whom heaven gave a piece of bread, without being obliged to
thank someone else than heaven itself!
`` With all that, '' said Sancho, `` that your grace has told me, it is not right for me to
there is no gratitude on our part two hundred gold shields that in
a pocket gave me the duke's butler, who as a pithy and comforting
I wear it on my heart, for whatever is offered; not always
we have to find castles where they give us gifts, that perhaps we will run into
some sales where we get beaten up.
In these and other reasonings were the errands, knight and squire,
when they saw, having walked little more than a league, that above the
grass of a green meadow, on top of their capes, they were eating up to a
dozen men, dressed as farmers. Next to each other they had some like
white sheets, with which they covered something that was underneath; They were
steep and stretched, and from stretch to stretch sunsets. Don Quixote arrived at
who ate, and, first greeting them politely, asked them what
what those canvases covered. One of them replied:
-Sir, below these canvases are some images of relief and planking
that they have to serve in an altarpiece that we make in our village; let's take them
covered, because they do not deflower, and on the shoulders, because they do not break.
`` If you are served, '' answered Don Quixote, `` I would be happy to see them,
images that are so modestly carried, without a doubt must be good.
-And how if they are! said another. If not, tell it what it costs: that in truth
that there is none that is not in more than fifty ducats; and, why see
your mercy this truth, wait your mercy, and see it has by sight of
eyes.
And, getting up, he stopped eating and went to remove the cover from the first
image, which was shown to be that of Saint George on horseback, with a serpent
curled at the feet and the spear pierced by the mouth, with the fierceness that
it is usually painted. The whole image looked like a golden ember, as usual
say. Seeing her, Don Quixote said:
-This knight was one of the best walkers that the divine militia had:
His name was Don San Jorge, and he was also a defender of maidens. Let's see this
other.
The man discovered it, and it seemed to be that of Saint Martin on horseback, who
he split the cloak with the poor man; and Don Quixote had hardly seen her, when
said:
-This gentleman was also one of the Christian adventurers, and I think he was
more liberal than brave, as you can see, Sancho, what is
splitting the cape with the poor man and giving him half; and without a doubt it must be
then winter, if not, he would give it all, according to
charitable.
"It shouldn't have been that," said Sancho, "but it must have followed the saying
They say: that to give and have, brains are necessary.
Don Quixote laughed and asked that another canvas be removed, under which
discovered the image of the Patron of Spain on horseback, the sword
bloody, running over moors and stepping on heads; and, on seeing her, he said
Don Quixote:
-This one is a knight, and one of the squads of Christ; this is called don
San Diego Matamoros, one of the bravest saints and knights who ever had
the world and now has the sky.
Then they discovered another canvas, and it seemed to cover up the fall of St.
Pablo on the horse below, with all the circumstances that in the altarpiece of
their conversion is usually painted. When I saw him so alive, that they said that
Christ spoke to him and Paul responded.
`` This, '' said Don Quixote, `` was the greatest enemy that the Church of God had.
Our Lord in his time, and the greatest defender of yours you will ever have:
knight errant for life, and saint on foot I remain for death,
tireless worker in the vineyard of the Lord, doctor of the nations, whom
the heavens served as schools and as a professor and teacher who taught him
Jesus Christ himself.
There were no more images, and thus, Don Quixote ordered that they be covered again,
and said to those who carried them:
- By good omen I have had, brothers, to have seen what I have seen, because
these saints and knights professed what I profess, which is the exercise
of weapons; but the difference between me and them is that they
They were holy and they fought the divine, and I am a sinner and I fight the human.
They conquered heaven by force of arms, because heaven suffers
strength, and until now I do not know what I achieve by strength of my work;
but if my Dulcinea del Toboso came out of those who suffer, my
good fortune, and my judgment hardened, it could be that
better path than I take.
"God hear it and sin be deaf," Sancho said on this occasion.
The men were admired, both of the figure and of the reasons of gift
Quixote, without understanding half of what he wanted to say in them. They finished
eat, they carried their images, and, saying goodbye to Don Quixote,
they continued their journey.
Sancho was left again as if he had never met his lord, admired
than he knew, seeming to him that there should be no history in the world or
event that did not have it encrypted on the nail and stuck in memory, and
said to him:
-In truth, our lord, that if what has happened to us today can be
call adventure, she has been the softest and sweetest that in the whole
speech of our pilgrimage has happened to us: from it we have left without
sticks and any startle, nor have we reached for swords, nor have we
the earth churned with the bodies, nor are we hungry. Blessed be
God, how did you let me see with my own eyes.
`` You say well, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` but you must warn that
all times are one, nor do they have the same fate, and this that the
The common people usually call omens, which are not based on natural reason
some, of which it is discreet have to be held and judged as good
events. Get up one of these doomsayers in the morning, come out of your
home, meet a friar of the order of blessed St.
Francisco, and, as if he had found a gryphon, turns his back
and go home. Spill the salt on the table to the other Mendoza,
and melancholy poured into him through his heart, as if he were obliged
nature to give signs of the coming misfortunes with things so
little time like the aforementioned. The discreet and Christian is not to walk in
dotted with what heaven wants to do. Cipión arrives in Africa, stumbles
in leaping on the ground, his soldiers hold him as an ill omen; but,
hugging the ground, he said: `` You will not be able to flee from me, Africa, because you
I have a hold and in my arms. '' So, Sancho, having met with
These images have been a very happy event for me.
`` I believe so, '' answered Sancho, `` and I would like your grace to tell me
what is the cause why do the Spanish say when they want to give some
battle, invoking that San Diego Matamoros: "Santiago, and close,
Spain!"Is Spain by chance open, and so is it necessary
close it, or what ceremony is this?
"You are very simple, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; and look at this great
Knight of the red cross God has given it to Spain as patron and protection
his, especially in the rigorous trances that with the Moors the
Spaniards have had; and thus, they invoke him and call him as their defender in
all the battles they wage, and many times they have visibly seen him
in them, demolishing, trampling, destroying and killing the hagarians
squads; and this truth could bring you many examples that in the
true Spanish stories are told.
Sancho spoke, and said to his master:
I am amazed, sir, at the ease of Altisidora, the maiden of
the Duchess: bravely it must have been wounded and pierced by the one who
They call Love, who say that he is a rapacious Ceguezuelo that, with being lagacious,
or, better to say, without sight, if you take a heart for white, for small
Whatever, he hits and pierces from part to part with his arrows. I have heard
also say that in the shame and modesty of the maidens they stand out and
the loving arrows blunt, but in this Altisidora more seems to be
they sharpen that they stand out.
`` Warn, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` that love neither respects nor respects
keeps terms of reason in his speeches, and has the same condition as
death: that is how he attacks the high fortresses of the kings as the
humble shepherds' huts, and when he takes entire possession of a soul,
The first thing it does is take away the fear and shame; and so without her
Altisidora declared her desires, which engendered confusion in my chest before
what a pity.
"Notorious cruelty!" Sancho said. Unheard of ungratefulness! I know about myself
say that I surrender and overwhelm the slightest reason for love of hers.
Hide whore, and what a heart of marble, what bowels of bronze, and what soul of
mortar! But I cannot think what this maiden saw in your
Thank you so he would surrender and dominate her: what a gala, what verve, what grace,
what a face, that each thing by itself, or all together, made him fall in love; that
in truth in truth that many times I stop to look at your mercy from
the tip of the foot to the last hair of the head, and that I see more things
to scare than to fall in love; and, having also heard that the
beauty is the first and main part that falls in love, not having your
No mercy, I don't know what the poor thing fell in love with.
`` Warn, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that there are two ways of
beauty: one of the soul and the other of the body; that of the soul champions and shows
in understanding, in honesty, in good behavior, in
liberality and in good upbringing, and all these parts fit and can
be in an ugly man; and when you look at this beauty, and not at
that of the body, love is usually born with impetus and with advantages. I, Sancho,
Well I see that I am not beautiful, but I also know that I am not distorted; and
It is enough for a good man not to be a monster to be well loved, as
have the gifts of the soul that I have told you.
In these reasons and talks they were entering a jungle that outside the
The way he was, at the wrong time, without thinking about it, Don Quixote found himself
entangled between some networks of green thread, which from one tree to another
they were lying; and, unable to imagine what that could be, he said to
Sancho:
-It seems to me, Sancho, that this of these networks must be one of the newest
adventures you can imagine. Let them kill me if the enchanters who
they do not want to get entangled in them and stop my way, as in
revenge of the rigidity that with Altisidora I have had. Well, I send them
that, although these nets, if, as they are made of green thread, they were
very hard diamonds, or stronger than that with which the jealous god of
the blacksmiths entangled Venus and Mars, thus breaking it as if it were
marine reeds or cotton lint.
And, wanting to go ahead and break everything, they suddenly offered
ahead, emerging from among some trees, two beautiful shepherds; to what
less, dressed as shepherds, but the coats and skirts were of fine
brocade, I say, that the skirts were very rich gold tabí skirts.
They had their hair down their backs, which in blondes could compete
with the rays of the sun itself; which were crowned with two garlands of
woven laurel green and amaranth red. Age, apparently, was not
he was fifteen or more than eighteen.
It was this sight that admired Sancho, suspended Don Quixote, made the
sun in his race to see them, and had in wonderful silence all
four. Anyway, the one who spoke first was one of the two girls, who said to
Don Quixote:
-Hold, sir knight, the step, and do not break the nets, which does not stop
your damage, but for our pastime, they are lying there; and because
I know that you have to ask us what they have worn and who we are.
I want to say in short words. In a village that is up to two leagues from
here, where there are many leading people and many noblemen and wealthy people, among
many friends and relatives agreed that with their sons, wives and daughters,
neighbors, friends and relatives, let us come to enjoy this place, which is
one of the most pleasant of all these contours, forming among all
a new and pastoral Arcadia, dressing us the maids of zagalas and the
young shepherds. We have studied two eclogues, one of the famous poet
Garcilaso, and another from His Excellency Camoes, in his own language
Portuguese, which until now we have not represented. Yesterday was the
first day we arrived here; among these bouquets we have planted some
tents, which they say are called tents, on the bank of a rich stream
that all these meadows fertilize; last night we tended these nets of
these trees to deceive the simple little birds, which, peeked with our
noise, they come to hit them. If you like, sir, to be our guest,
you will be liberally and courteously entertained; because for now on this site no
neither sorrow nor melancholy must enter.
He was silent and said no more. To which Don Quixote replied:
-By the way, most beautiful lady, it shouldn't have been more suspense or
Anteon admired when he suddenly saw Diana bathe in the waters, like
I have been stunned to see your beauty. I praise the assumption of your
entertainments, and I thank you for your offerings; and, if I can
serve, with the certainty of being obeyed you can send it to me; Because it is not
this is my profession, but to show myself grateful and benefactor with everything
gender of people, especially with the main one that your people
It represents; and, if like these networks, they must occupy some small
space, they will occupy all the roundness of the earth, I will seek new worlds
to do without breaking them; and why do you give any credit to this my
exaggeration, see that he promises you, at least, Don Quixote de la Mancha,
if this name has reached your ears.
"Oh, friend of my soul," said the other girl then, "and what a fortune
great has happened to us! Do you see this man in front of us? Then do you
to know that he is the bravest, and the most in love, and the most restrained that
has the world, if it is not that it lies to us and deceives us a story that
His exploits are in print and I have read. I'll bet this good man
who comes with him is a certain Sancho Panza, his squire, thanks to whom he
there are none that match it.
"This is the truth," said Sancho, "that I am that funny man and that squire who
your grace says, and this gentleman is my master, the same Don Quixote of the
Historic and referred spot.
-Oh! said the other. Let us beg you, friend, to stay; that our
parents and our brothers will like infinite dello, that I have also heard
to say about their value and their graces the same as you have told me, and, on
everything, they say of him that he is the strongest and most loyal lover known, and that
His lady is a certain Dulcinea del Toboso, who is given the
palm of beauty.
`` With good reason, '' said Don Quixote, `` if you no longer question it.
unmatched beauty. Do not tire, ladies, in stopping me, because the
The precise obligations of my profession do not allow me to rest on any point.
He arrived, in this, where the four were a brother of one of the two
shepherds, also dressed as a shepherd, with the wealth and finery that
the zagalas corresponded; they told him that the one who was with them was
the brave Don Quixote de la Mancha, and the other, his squire Sancho, of
who had already heard from him, for having read his story. He was offered the
gallant pastor, asked him to come with him to his tents; hubolo de
grant Don Quixote, and he did so.
In this, the eye came, the nets were filled with different little birds that,
deluded by the color of the nets, they fell into danger that they were
running away. More than thirty people gathered in that place, all
bizarrely of dressed shepherds and shepherds, and in an instant they were
aware of who Don Quixote and his squire were, that not a little
glad they received, because they already had the news for his story.
They went to the shops, found the tables set, rich, abundant and
clean; they honored Don Quixote by giving him first place in them; they looked at him
everyone, and they were amazed to see him.
Finally, the tablecloths raised, with great repose Don Quixote raised his voice,
and said:
-Among the major sins that men commit, although some say
what pride is, I say it is ungratefulness, sticking to what
It is often said: that hell is full of the ungrateful. East
sin, as far as possible, I have tried to flee from the
moment that I had use of reason; and if I cannot pay the good works that
do with other works, I put in their place the desires to do them, and when
These are not enough, I publish them; because who says and publishes good works
who receives, will also reward them with others, if he could; because, for the
For the most part, those who receive are inferior to those who give; and so it is God
over all, because he is a giver over all and the
gifts of man to those of God with equality, by infinite distance; and
This narrowness and shortness, in a way, is supplemented by gratitude. Me,
Well, grateful to the mercy that has been done to me here, not being able to
correspond to the same measure, restraining myself within the narrow limits of
my power, I offer what I can and what I have from my harvest; and so I say
that I will sustain two calendar days in goal of that royal road that is going to
Zaragoza, that these distorted sagalas ladies that are here are the most
beautiful and most courteous maidens in the world, exceeded only to the
unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso, the only lady of my thoughts, may she be
said of how many and how many listen to me.
Hearing which, Sancho, who had been listening with great attention,
giving a great voice, he said:
-Is it possible that there are people in the world who dare to say and swear
that this my lord is crazy? Say your favors, gentlemen pastors: is there
village priest, however discreet and student who may be, who can say what
that my master has said, nor is there a knight errant, no matter how famous
brave, who can offer what my master here has offered?
Don Quixote turned to Sancho, and, flushed and angry, said to him:
-Is it possible, oh Sancho, that there is in the whole world some person who says
that you are not stupid, covered in the same, with I do not know what borders of malicious
and of mischievous? Who gets you into my things, and to find out if I am
discreet or silly? Shut up and do not reply to me, but saddle up, if it is
unsaddled Rocinante: we are going to put into effect my offer, which, with
the reason that goes on my part, you can give up all who
they would like to contradict it.
And, with great fury and displays of anger, he rose from the chair, leaving
admired bystanders, making them doubt whether they could have
crazy or sane. Finally, having persuaded him not to
such a demand, that they took their grateful will as well known and that
no further demonstrations were necessary to know his courageous spirit, for
enough those that in the history of their events referred, with all this,
Don Quixote left with his intention; and, placed on Rocinante, embracing
his shield and taking his spear, he stood in the middle of a royal road that
far from the green meadow it was. Sancho followed him on his dart, with all the
people of the pastoral flock, eager to see what their arrogant and
never seen offering.
Put then, Don Quixote in the middle of the road -as I have told you-, he wounded the
air with such words:
-Oh you, passengers and pedestrians, gentlemen, squires, people of a
foot and on horseback that you pass by, or have to pass on these
next two days! Know that Don Quixote de la Mancha, knight errant,
is here put to defend that all the beauties and courtesies of the
world exceed those that are enclosed in the nymphs inhabiting these meadows
and forests, leaving aside the lady of my soul Dulcinea del Toboso.
Therefore, whoever seems contrary, come, I will wait for you here.
Twice he repeated these same reasons, and twice they were not heard from
no adventurer; but luck, that his things were heading for better
better, ordered that from there to little be discovered on the way
crowd of horsemen, and many of them with spears at
hands, walking all huddled together, in a crowd and in great haste. There were not
well seen those who were with Don Quixote, when, turning their backs,
they moved well away from the road, because they knew that if they waited for them
some danger could happen; only Don Quixote, with an intrepid heart,
He remained, and Sancho Panza hid himself with Rocinante's haunches.
The crowd of spearmen came, and one of them, who was coming further ahead,
great voices began to say to Don Quixote:
-Get away, man of the devil, from the road, they will tear you to pieces
Bulls!
`` Hey, scoundrel, '' answered Don Quixote, `` for me there are no bulls that are worth it,
although they are one of the bravest that Jarama breeds on its banks! Confess,
miscreants, like this with a closed load, that it is true what I have here
published; If not, you are in battle with me.
The cowboy had no place to reply, nor did Don Quixote have to deviate,
even if I wanted; and thus, the flock of brave bulls and that of the meek
halters, with the crowd of cowboys and other people to lock up
they took them to a place where another day they had to come, they passed over
Don Quixote, and on Sancho, Rocinante and the rucio, finding all of them in
earth, rolling him on the ground. Sancho was crushed, frightened don
Quixote, beaten by the black and not very Catholic Rocinante; but, well, I know
they all got up, and Don Quixote, in great haste, stumbling here and falling
There, he began to run after the herd, saying loudly:
-Stop and wait, you scoundrel, that only one knight awaits you,
which has no condition or is of the opinion of those who say that the enemy
who flees, make him the silver bridge!
But that was not why the hurrying runners stopped, nor did they do more
case of their threats than of the clouds of yesteryear. Stop the fatigue
Don Quixote, and, more angry than avenged, sat on the road, waiting for
that Sancho, Rocinante and the rucio arrived. They arrived, they went back up, master
and young man, and, without saying goodbye to the pretended or distorted Arcadia, and
with more shame than pleasure, they continued on their way.
Chapter LIX. Where the extraordinary event is told, which can be
take for adventure, what happened to Don Quixote
To the dust and fatigue that Don Quixote and Sancho took from
discomfiture of the bulls, helped a clear and clean source that enters
a fresh grove they found, on the margin of which, leaving free, without
jáquima and brake, to the rucio and to Rocinante, the two master and groom
sat down. Sancho went to the pastry shop from his saddlebags, and took them out of the
which he used to call condumio; rinsed his mouth, don Quixote washed the
face, with whose refreshment the discouraged spirits took breath. No
Don Quixote ate out of sheer regret, nor did Sancho dare touch the
delicacies in front of him, out of pure restraint, and he waited for his lord
make the salvo; but, seeing that, taken from his imaginations, he does not know
remembered to put the bread in his mouth, he did not open his, and, running over
all kinds of upbringing, began to pack bread and cheese in his stomach
that was offered to him.
`` Eat, Sancho friend, '' said Don Quixote, `` it sustains life, that more than me
you care, and let me die at the hands of my thoughts and forces of
my misfortunes. I, Sancho, was born to live dying, and you to die
eating; and, because you see that I am telling you the truth in this, consider me printed in
stories, famous in arms, restrained in my actions, respected from
princes, requested of maidens; after all, when I expected
palms, triumphs and crowns, earned and deserved by my brave
feats, I saw myself this morning trodden and hardened and crushed from the feet of
filthy and filthy animals. This consideration dulls my teeth,
dulls the molars, and dulls the hands, and removes everything in all
desire to eat, so I intend to let myself starve: death the most
cruel of deaths.
"That way," said Sancho, still chewing hastily, "he won't approve of your
At the mercy of that saying that they say: "die Marta, and die fed up." I, to
less, I am not going to kill myself; Before I do like the shoemaker,
who pulls the leather with his teeth until he gets it where he wants it;
I will waste my life eating until I reach the end that has determined
heaven; and know, sir, that there is no greater madness than that which touches on wanting
despair as your mercy, and believe me, and after eaten, go to
sleep a little on the green mattresses of these herbs, and you will see how when
waking up is somewhat more relieved.
Don Quixote did so, seeming to him that Sancho's reasons were more
philosopher than fool, and said to him:
-If you, oh Sancho, wanted to do for me what I will now tell you, it would be
my truer reliefs and my not so great regrets; and is that,
while I sleep, obeying your advice, you stray a little far
from here, and with the reins of Rocinante, throwing your meat into the air, you
ten three hundred or four hundred lashes to good account of the three thousand and
so many that you have to give yourself up for Dulcinea's disappointment; what a pity no
little that that poor lady is delighted by your carelessness and
negligence.
"There is much to say in that," said Sancho. Let's sleep, for now, between us,
and then God said what will be. Your grace know that this whipping
a man in cold blood is a tough thing, especially if the lashes fall on a
body poorly supported and worse eaten: bear with me my lady Dulcinea,
that, when he least falls down, he will see me made a sieve, of whipping; and until
death, everything is life; I mean that I still have it, along with the desire
to fulfill what I have promised.
Don Quixote thanking him, ate something, and Sancho a lot, and they
sleep between them, leaving it to their will and without any order to
abundant grass that that meadow was full of the two continuous
companions and friends Rocinante and the rucio. They woke up a little late, they came back
to climb and continue on your way, rushing to get to a sale that,
apparently, a league away was discovered. I say it was sale because I don
Quixote called her that, out of the use she had of calling all sales
castles.
So they came to her; they asked the guest if there was an inn. Fueles
answered yes, with all the comfort and gift I could find in
Saragossa. They got out and Sancho picked up his pastries in a room, from whom
the guest gave him the key; led the beasts to the stable, threw their
feed, he went out to see what Don Quixote, who was sitting on a bench,
commanded him, giving particular thanks to heaven that his master did not
that sale would have seemed like a castle.
It was time for dinner; they were picked up at their stay; asked Sancho to
What did the guest have to give them for dinner? To which the guest replied
that his mouth would be measured; and thus, that he asked what he wanted: that of the
birds of the air, birds of the land and fish of the sea
that sale was provided.
-It is not necessary so much -answered Sancho-, that with a couple of chickens that we
asen we will have enough, because my lord is delicate and eats little, and I
I am not too greedy.
The host replied that he had no chickens, because the kites had them
devastated.
-Well, the guest sir, said Sancho, to roast a cock that is tender.
-Cock? My father! replied the host. In truth in truth that I sent
yesterday to the city to sell more than fifty; but, out of cocks, ask
your mercy whatever it wants.
"That way," said Sancho, "there will be no shortage of veal or kid."
`` At home, for now, '' replied the host, `` there isn't, because it has
finish; but next week there will be plenty of it.
-Medrados we are with that! Sancho answered. I will say that they come to
Summarize all these faults in the leftovers that there must be of bacon and
eggs.
`` By God, '' replied the guest, `` it is a nice thing that my guest
you have !, Well I told you that I neither have cocks nor chickens, and do you want me to
have eggs? Discuss, if you like, other delicacies, and stop
order chickens.
"Let us resolve, my body," said Sancho, "and finally tell me what
you have, and stop arguing, Mr. Guest.
Said the innkeeper:
-What I really and truly have are two cow nails that look like hands
veal, or two veal hands that look like cow's nails; they are cooked
with their chickpeas, onions and bacon, and now they are saying:
'' Eat me! Eat me! ''
"I mark them for me from here," said Sancho; and no one touches them, let me
I will pay better than another, because for me nothing else could expect from
more pleasure, and I would not be given anything that were hands, such as nails.
`` No one will touch them, '' said the innkeeper, `` because other guests I have,
Pure main, they bring with them cook, pantry and pastry.
"If you go by principal," said Sancho, "none other than my master;" but
trade that he brings does not allow pantries or liquor stores: there we lie down in
half of a meadow and we get fed up with acorns or medlars.
This was the conversation that Sancho had with the innkeeper, Sancho accidentally passed
forward to answer you; that I had already asked him what job or what
exercise was his master's.
So it was time for dinner, Don Quixote picked up his stay,
the guest took the pot, just as it was, and sat down to dinner very
purpose. It seems that in another room next to Don Quixote's
It was there, that it was only divided by a subtle partition, Don Quixote heard say:
-For the life of your grace, Mr. Don Jerónimo, that as long as he brings the
For dinner let's read another chapter of the second part of Don Quixote de la Mancha.
As soon as Don Quixote heard his name, when he got to his feet, his ear was alert.
listened to what they were talking about, and heard that this Don Jerónimo
answered:
-Why does your grace want us to read these
nonsense? And whoever has read the first part of Don's story
Quijote de la Mancha it is not possible that I could like to read this
second.
`` With all that, '' said don Juan, `` it will be good to read it, because there is no book so
bad that it does not have something good. What moves me the most in this one is
that paints Don Quixote already out of love with Dulcinea del Toboso.
Hearing this, Don Quixote, full of anger and spite, raised his voice and said:
-Whoever says that Don Quixote de la Mancha has forgotten, nor can
forget, Dulcinea del Toboso, I will make her understand with weapons equal to
it goes very far from the truth; because the unparalleled Dulcinea del Toboso cannot
be forgotten, nor in Don Quixote can there be forgetfulness: his coat of arms is the
firmness, and his profession, to keep it gently and without straining
some.
-Who is the one who answers us? they answered from the other room.
`` Who is it to be, '' answered Sancho, `` but Don Quixote himself from the
Mancha, what will do good what he has said, and even what he says ?; that good
payer does not hurt garments.
Scarcely had Sancho said this, when they entered the door of his room
two gentlemen, who seemed such, and one of them throwing his arms to the
Don Quixote's neck, he said:
-Neither your presence can deny your name, nor your name
may not prove your presence: without a doubt, you, sir, are the
true Don Quixote de la Mancha, north and star of the errant
cavalry, in spite and in spite of the one who has wanted to usurp your name and
annihilate your exploits, as the author of this book has done here
I give you.
And, putting a book in his hands, which his companion was carrying, he took gift
Quixote, and, without answering a word, began to leaf through him, and from there a little
he turned to him, saying:
-In this little that I have seen I have found three things in this author worthy of
reprimand. The first is some words that I have read in the foreword; the
another, that the language is Aragonese, because perhaps he writes without articles, and
The third, which confirms him most as ignorant, is that he errs and deviates from
the truth in the main thing in history; because here it says that the woman
of Sancho Panza my squire is called Mari Gutiérrez, and he does not call such, but
Teresa Panza; and whoever errs in this main part, may well be
fear that it errs in all the rest of history.
To this Sancho said:
"Nice thing for a historian!" By the way, it must be in the story
of our events, then call Teresa Panza, my wife, Mari Gutiérrez!
Take the book again, sir, and see if I am around and if I have moved
name.
`` From what I have heard, my friend, '' said Don Jerónimo, `` without a doubt you must
be Sancho Panza, the squire of Mr. Don Quixote.
"Yes, I am," answered Sancho, "and I appreciate it."
`` Well, by faith, '' said the knight, `` this modern author does not treat you with the
cleanliness that is shown in your person: paint us dining room, and simple, and not
nothing funny, and very different from Sancho than in the first part of the story
of your master is described.
"God forgive you," Sancho said. Leave me in my corner, without remembering
me, because whoever knows them rings them, and Saint Peter is fine in Rome.
The two gentlemen asked Don Quixote to come over to their ranch for dinner.
with them, who well knew that in that sale there were no
belonging to his person. Don Quixote, who was always restrained,
he agreed with their demand and dined with them; Sancho stayed with the pot with
mere mixed empire; sat at the head of the table, and with him the innkeeper, who
no less than Sancho was on his hands and on his fond nails.
In the dinner speech don Juan asked don Quixote what news he had
of Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso: if she had married, if she was born or
pregnant, or if, being in her integrity, she remembered - keeping her honesty
and good decorum- of the loving thoughts of Mr. Don Quixote. What
he answered:
-Dulcinea is whole, and my thoughts, firmer than ever; the
correspondences, in their ancient dryness; her beauty, in that of a rude
transformed farmer.
And then he was telling them point by point the charm of Mrs. Dulcinea,
and what had happened to him in the cave of Montesinos, with the order that the
the wise Merlin had given her to disenchant her, which was the whipping of
Sancho.
Great was the joy that the two gentlemen received from hearing Don
Quixote the strange events of his history, and thus they were admired
his nonsense as in the elegant way he told them. Here they had him
for discreet, and there they slipped by for foolish, without knowing how to determine
what grade would they give it between discretion and madness.
Sancho finished dinner, and, leaving the innkeeper an X, went to the
his master's stay; and, entering, said:
-Kill me, gentlemen, if the author of this book that you mercedes have
he wants us not to eat good crumbs together; I would like that, since it calls me
glutton, as your mercedes say, don't call me a drunk too.
`` Yes, he's calling, '' said Don Jerónimo, `` but I don't remember in what way, although I know
that the reasons are rude, and furthermore, liars, according to me
in the physiognomy of the good Sancho who is present.
Believe me your mercies, said Sancho, that Sancho and Don Quixote
history must be other than those who walk in the one that Cide composed
Hamete Benengeli, who are we: my master, brave, discreet and
in love; and me, simple funny, and neither eater nor drunk.
"I think so," don Juan said. and if it were possible, it had to be ordered that
no one would dare to deal with the things of the great Don Quixote, if it were not
Cide Hamete, its first author, as well as Alexander commanded that none
was daring to portray him but Apelles.
"Take me back whoever you want," said Don Quixote, "but don't mistreat me; that
patience often fails when charged with insults.
`` None, '' don Juan said, `` can be done to Mr. Don Quixote of whom he
cannot take revenge, if he does not repair it in the shield of his patience, that, to my
it seems, it is strong and big.
In these and other talks he spent a large part of the night; and, although don
Juan would like Don Quixote to read more of the book, to see what
he was disgusted, they couldn't finish him off, saying that he considered it read
and confirmed it for all foolishness, and that he did not want to, if he ever made the news
of its author who had held him in his hands, he would be glad to think that he
I had read; because of the obscene and clumsy things, the thoughts have
to move away, the more the eyes. They asked him where he was leading
determined your trip. He replied that to Zaragoza, to be in the fair
harness, which in that city are usually made every year. Told him
don Juan that that new story told as Don Quixote, whoever
If you like, it had been found in her in a ring, lack of invention,
poor of letters, very poor of liveries, yet rich in simplicity.
`` For the same case, '' answered Don Quixote, `` I will not set foot in Zaragoza,
and thus I will bring to the square of the world the lie of the modern historian, and
people will see how I am not the Don Quixote he says.
"It will do very well," said Don Jerónimo; and other fair there are in Barcelona, ​​where
Mr. Don Quixote will be able to show his courage.
"I intend to do so," said Don Quixote; and your mercedes give me a license,
Well, it's time to go to bed, and have me and put on the number of
his greatest friends and servants.
"And me too," said Sancho, "maybe I'll be good for something."
With this they said goodbye, and Don Quixote and Sancho retired to their room,
leaving don Juan and don Jerónimo astonished to see the mixture that had
made of his discretion and his madness; and they truly believed that these
They were the real Don Quixote and Sancho, and not the ones described by their author
Aragonese.
Don Quixote got up early, and, knocking on the partition of the other room,
said goodbye to his guests. Sancho paid the landlord magnificently, and
advised him to praise the provision of his sale less, or have it more
provided.
Chapter LX. Of what happened to Don Quixote going to Barcelona
The morning was cool, and it showed signs of being so on the day when Don
Quixote left the sale, finding out first which was the most upright
way to go to Barcelona without touching Zaragoza: such was the desire that
had to draw a liar that new historian who so much said that he
reviled.
It happened, then, that in more than six days nothing worth wearing happened to him.
writing, after which, going out of the way, he took the
night among thick holm oaks or cork oaks; that in this does not keep the
punctuality Cide Hamete that in other things usually.
They dismounted from their master and groom beasts, and, accommodating themselves to the trunks of the
trees, Sancho, who had had a picnic that day, let himself in rondón
through the doors of sleep; but Don Quixote, to whom they revealed their
imaginations much more than hunger, he could not close his eyes; I used to go and
He came with the thought for a thousand kinds of places. It seemed to him that he was already
in the cave of Montesinos; and to see jump and climb on his chick to the
turned into a farmer Dulcinea; since the
words of the wise Merlin that related to him the conditions and procedures that
they were to be made and held to the disenchantment of Dulcinea. Despaired of
to see the weakness and charity of Sancho his squire, then, to what he believed,
only five lashes had been given, an unequal number and small for the
infinities that were missing; and of this he received so much sorrow and anger, that
made this speech:
-If the Gordian knot cut the Great Alexander, saying: `` Both mount cut
how to untie '', and not for that reason ceased to be universal lord of all Asia,
neither more nor less could happen now in Dulcinea's disenchantment, if I
whip Sancho in spite of himself; that if the condition of this remedy is in
that Sancho receives the three thousand and so many lashes, what do I get that
He gives them, or someone else gives them, because the substance is that he
receive, arrive by do they arrive?
With this imagination, Sancho was arrived at, having first taken the reins
of Rocinante, and arranged them so that he could whip him with them,
began to remove the tapes, which is the opinion that he had only the
front, on which the greguescos were based; but, it had barely arrived,
when Sancho woke up in all his agreement, and said:
-What is this? Who touches me and untapes?
"I am," answered Don Quixote, "who come to supply your faults and to remedy
my works: come to whip you, Sancho, and to discharge, in part, the debt to
that you forced yourself. Dulcinea perishes; you live in neglect; I die wishing;
and thus, unleash yourself by your will, that mine is to give you in this loneliness,
at least two thousand lashes.
"Not that," said Sancho; your mercy is staying; if not, by God
true that the deaf have to hear us. The lashes to which I forced myself have
to be volunteers, and not by force, and now I don't feel like whipping myself;
it is enough that I give to your mercy my word to whip and piss me off when in
will come to me.
`` You must not leave it to your courtesy, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` because you are hard
of heart, and, although villain, soft of meat.
And so she tried and struggled to unlink him. Seeing which Sancho Panza,
He rose to his feet, and, attacking his master, embraced him broadly,
and, tripping him, hit him on the ground on his back; push him
his right knee on his chest, and with his hands he held his hands,
so that he neither surrounded nor encouraged him. Don Quixote told him:
-What, traitor? Against your master and natural lord you go out of control? With whom do you
give your bread, do you dare?
`` I don't take away a king, nor do I put a king, '' answered Sancho, `` but help me, who am
my Sir. Your mercy promise me that you will stay, and will not try to
scourge me for now, that I will set him free and unfettered; where no,
Here you will die, traitor,
enemy of Dona Sancha.
Don Quixote promised him, and swore by the life of his thoughts not to touch him in
the hair of the clothes, and that he would leave in all his will and will the
whip himself whenever he wanted.
Sancho got up, and a good space deviated from that place; and, going to
leaning against another tree, felt a touch on his head, and, raising his
hands, ran into two feet of person, with shoes and leggings. He trembled with fear;
He went to another tree, and the same thing happened to him. He called out for Don Quixote
that favored him. Don Quixote did so, and, asking him what had happened to him
happened and what he was afraid of, Sancho replied that all those
trees were full of human feet and legs. Don Quixote tempted them,
and then he realized what it could be, and said to Sancho:
-You do not have to be afraid, because these feet and legs that you feel and do not
You see, without a doubt they are from some outlaws and bandits who in these trees
they are hanged; that around here the justice usually hangs them when they
take, twenty to twenty and thirty to thirty; where do I give myself to
understand that I must be close to Barcelona.
And that was the truth as he had imagined it.
Apparently they raised their eyes, and saw the clusters of those trees, which
they were the bodies of bandits. Already, in this, dawned, and if the dead
they had scared, no less troubled, more than forty living bandits
who suddenly surrounded them, telling them in Catalan that
they stayed, and stopped, until their captain arrived.
Don Quixote was found on foot, his horse unbridled, his spear leaning against a
tree, and, finally, without any defense; and thus, it was for the sake of crossing
hands and bow the head, saving for better seasoning and joint.
The bandits came to glean the rucio, and not leave anything
how many in the saddlebags and suitcase he had; and let Sancho know that
the duke's shields and those
they had taken from their land, and, with all that, these good people
he would weed and look at him until what between the leather and the meat had
hidden, if his captain did not arrive at that time, who showed himself to be of
up to the age of thirty-four, robust, more than middle
proportion, looking serious and brown. He came on a mighty horse,
dressed in the steely coat, and with four pistols - which in that land
they call pedreñales- on the sides. He saw that his squires, which is what they call the
who are in that exercise, they were going to strip Sancho Panza; he told them
they did not, and was then obeyed; and thus the ventrera escaped.
He was amazed to see the spear leaning against the tree, shield on the ground, and Don Quixote
armed and thoughtful, with the saddest and most melancholic figure that could
form the same sadness. He came to him saying:
Do not be so sad, good man, because you have not fallen into the hands of
some cruel Osiris, but in those of Roque Guinart, which have more than
compassionate than rigorous.
`` It is not my sadness, '' answered Don Quixote, `` that I have fallen into your power, oh
brave Roque, whose fame there are no limits on earth that enclose it!
but because I was so careless that your soldiers caught me without
the bridle, being obliged, according to the order of the errant cavalry, that
I profess, to live I remain alert, being at all hours a sentinel of me
same; because I let you know, oh great Roque, that if they found me on my
horse, with my spear and with my shield, it was not very easy for them to surrender,
because I am Don Quixote de la Mancha, the one who of his exploits has
I fill the whole orb.
Later, Roque Guinart learned that Don Quixote's illness touched more on
madness than in bravery, and though she had sometimes heard him name,
never took his facts to be true, nor could he be persuaded that such a
humor reigned in the heart of man; and was delighted to have
found, to touch closely what he had heard from afar; and so,
said:
- Courageous gentleman, do not be angry or have sinister fortune this
in which you are, that it could be that in these stumbling blocks your crooked
luck straightens; that the sky, by strangers and never seen detours, of
unimagined men, tends to raise the fallen and enrich the
poor.
Don Quixote was about to thank him when they felt behind them a
noise as of a troop of horses, and was but a single, on which
a young man, apparently up to twenty years old, was coming at full fury, dressed in
green damask, with gold handrails, greguesques and embarkation, with
plywood hat, walloon, waxed and fair boots, spurs, dagger and
golden sword, a small shotgun in the hands and two pistols to the
sides. Roque turned his head to the noise and saw this beautiful figure, which,
on reaching him, he said:
-In your search I came, oh brave Roque !, to find in you, if not a remedy,
at least relief in my misery; and, for not suspending you, because I know that
You have not met me, I want to tell you who I am: and I am Claudia Jerónima, daughter
of Simón Forte, your singular friend and particular enemy of Clauquel
Torrellas, which is also yours, for being one of your opposite
side; and you already know that this Torrellas has a son that Don Vicente
Torrellas is called, or, at least, it was called not two hours ago. This, then,
To shorten the story of my misadventure, I will tell you in a few words what
has caused me. I saw me, asked me, listened to him, fell in love, stealing from me
dad; because there is no woman, however retired and modest she may be, to
who does not have enough time to put in execution and effect his run over
wishes. Finally, he promised to be my husband, and I gave him the floor
to be his, without moving forward in works. I knew yesterday that, forgotten
than he owed me, he was marrying another, and that this morning he was going to marry,
new that disturbed my sense and finished my patience; and, for not being my
father in the place, I had him put on the suit you see, and
Hastening the pace of this horse, I caught up with Don Vicente by the work of a league
from here; and without complaining or apologizing, I shot these
shotguns, and, in addition, these two pistols; and, to what I believe, I owed
to enclose more than two bullets in the body, opening doors through which
wrapped in his blood my honor would come out. There I leave him among his servants, who
they did not dare and could not stand in his defense. I come to look for you so that I
go to France, where I have relatives with whom I live, and I also beg you
defend my father, because the many of Don Vicente do not dare to
take outrageous revenge on him.
Roque, admired by the gallantry, bizarre, good size and success of the
beautiful Claudia, he said:
-Come, ma'am, and we will see if your enemy is killed, then we will see what
What else will you care about?
Don Quixote, who was listening carefully to what Claudia had said and
to which Roque Guinart replied, he said:
-He has no one to take work to defend this lady, who
I take charge: give me my horse and my weapons, and wait for me here, that I
I'll go find that gentleman, and dead or alive I'll make him keep his word
promised to so much beauty.
"No one doubts this," said Sancho, "because my lord has a very good hand.
for a matchmaker, since it has not been many days that he married another who also
she would deny another maiden her word; and if it weren't because the enchanters
who persecute him changed his true figure into that of a lackey, this
outside the hour that such a maiden was no longer so.
Roque, who paid more attention to thinking about the event of the beautiful Claudia than about
the reasons of master and waiter, he did not understand; and, commanding his squires to
to return to Sancho everything that had been taken from the rodent, sending them
also that they retired to the part where that night they had been
lodged, and then set off with Claudia in a hurry to look for the wounded man, or
dead, Don Vicente. They arrived at the place where Claudia found him, and
they found in him but freshly shed blood; but, looking down
everywhere, they discovered some people on the top of the hill, and
understand, as was the truth, that it must be Don Vicente, whom his
Servants, or dead or alive, they carried, or to cure him, or to bury him;
They hurried to catch up, which, as they were of space, easily
they made.
They found Don Vicente in the arms of his servants, whom with weariness and weariness
weakened voice begged to be left there to die, because the pain of the
wounds did not allow it to happen later.
Claudia and Roque threw themselves from the horses, they came to him, they feared the
The presence of Roque was brought up, and Claudia was disturbed to see Don Vicente's;
and thus, between tender and rigorous, she reached out to him, and grasped him by the
hands, he said:
-If you gave me these, according to our concert, you would never see yourself in
this step.
The wounded knight opened his almost closed eyes, and, knowing Claudia,
Told him:
-I see well, beautiful and deceived lady, that you have been the one who has killed me:
grief not deserved or due to my wishes, with which, nor with my works,
I never wanted or knew how to offend you.
"Then, isn't it true," said Claudia, "that you were going this morning to marry
Leonora, the daughter of the rich Balvastro?
"No, by the way," answered Don Vicente; my bad fortune must have taken you
these news, so that, jealous, you took my life, which, well, I leave it
In your hands and in your arms, I have my luck fortunately. And to
assure you of this truth, squeeze my hand and receive me as a husband, yes
you want, that I have no other greater satisfaction than to give you the grievance that
you think you have received from me.
Claudia squeezed her hand, and her heart squeezed, so that
on Don Vicente's blood and chest she fainted, and he took
a deadly parasism. Roque was confused, and he didn't know what to do.
The servants came to look for water to pour on their faces, and
they brought it up, with which they were bathed. Claudia returned from her faint, but no
of his parasism Don Vicente, because his life is over. Seen which of
Claudia, having learned that her sweet husband no longer lived, broke the
airs with sighs, wounded the skies with complaints, mistreated their hair,
handing them to the wind, he disfigured his face with his bare hands, with all
the samples of pain and feeling that a sore chest could
imagine.
`` Oh cruel and inconsiderate woman, '' she said, `` how easily did you move to
implement such a bad thought! O raging force of jealousy,
what a desperate end you lead to the one who welcomes you in his bosom! Oh husband
mine, whose unfortunate luck, being my pledge, has led you from the thalamus to
the burial!
Such and so sad were Claudia's complaints, that they drew tears from
Roque's eyes, not used to pouring them out on any occasion.
The servants were crying, Claudia fainted at every step, and all that
circuit seemed a field of sadness and a place of misfortune. Finally, Roque
Guinart ordered Don Vicente's servants to take his body to the place
of his father, who was nearby, to be buried. Claudia
He told Roque that he wanted to go to a monastery where an aunt was abbess
his, in which he thought to end his life, of another better and more eternal husband
accompanied. Roque praised her for her good purpose, he offered to accompany her
as far as he wanted, and to defend his father from relatives and everything
the world, if it wanted to offend. Claudia did not want his company, in any
way, and, thanking your offers with the best reasons that I knew,
she said goodbye to him crying. Don Vicente's servants carried his body, and
Roque turned to his family, and for this purpose Claudia's loves had
Jeronima. But how much, if they wove the fabric of their sorry story
the invincible and rigorous forces of jealousy?
Roque Guinart found his squires in the part where he had ordered them, and
to Don Quixote among them, about Rocinante, giving them a talk in which
persuaded them to stop that dangerous way of life, so for the soul
as for the body; but, since most of them were Gascons, rustic people and
Disrupted, they did not go well with Don Quixote's talk. Arrived that was
Roque, asked Sancho Panza if the jewels had been returned and restored
and jewels that his own from the dart had taken from him. Sancho replied that
yes, but it lacked three dressing tables, which were worth three cities.
-What are you saying, man? -said one of those present-, that I
I have, and they are not worth three reais.
`` Yes, '' said Don Quixote, `` but my squire esteem them in what he has said,
for having given them to me who gave them to me.
Send them back to the Roque Guinart point, and, having theirs put in
wing, he had all the clothes, jewels, and money, and all
what had been stolen since the last distribution; and, doing
briefly the score, returning the non-distributable and reducing it to money,
distributed it throughout his company, with such legality and prudence that
It passed a point and did not disappoint anything in distributive justice. Done this, with
which all were happy, satisfied and paid, said Roque to Don
Quixote:
-If this punctuality was not kept with these, one could not live with
them.
To which Sancho said:
-According to what I have seen here, justice is so good that it is necessary to
be used even among thieves themselves.
A squire heard only, and raised the back of an arquebus, with which, without
doubt, he would open Sancho's head, if Roque Guinart did not give him voices that
stopped. Sancho was amazed, and proposed not to tear his lips apart as long as
that he was among those people.
At this, one or some of those squires who were placed by
sentries on the roads to see the people who came for them and give
He warned his eldest of what was happening, and he said:
-Sir, not far from here, on the way to Barcelona, ​​a great
throng of people.
To which Roque replied:
-Have you checked to see if they are one of those who are looking for us, or of those that we
we look for?
"No, but the kind we are looking for," replied the squire.
"Well, all of you," replied Roque, "and bring them here later, without being told
escape none.
They did so, and, leaving Don Quixote, Sancho, and Roque alone, they waited
to see what the squires brought; and, in the meantime, Roque said to don
Quixote:
-New way of life must seem to Mr. Don Quixote ours,
new adventures, new events, and all dangerous; and I do not wonder that
so it seems, because I really confess that there is no way to live anymore
restless nor more startled than ours. They have put me in it, I don't know
what a desire for revenge, which has the power to disturb the calmest
hearts; I, of my nature, am compassionate and well-intentioned; but how
I have said, wanting to take revenge for an injury that was done to me,
all my good inclinations on the ground, which I persevere in this state, to
spite and regret for what I understand; And, as one abyss calls another and one
sin to another sin, revenge has been linked in such a way that not only
mine, but I take care of others; but God is served by that,
Although I see myself in the middle of the labyrinth of my confusions, I do not lose the
hope of leaving him to a safe harbor.
Don Quixote was amazed to hear Roque speak so well and in concert
reasons, because he thought that, among those of similar trades of
steal, kill and skip there could be no one that had a good speech, and
replied:
-Mr. Roque, the principle of health is in knowing the disease and in
the sick person wanting to take the medicines that the doctor orders them: your
mercy is ill, knows his ailment, and heaven, or God, for the better
say, he is our doctor, he will apply medicines that heal him, the
which usually heal little by little and not suddenly and by miracle; and more, what
discreet sinners are closer to making amends than simple ones; and,
for your grace has shown its prudence in its reasons, there is nothing but
be of good spirits and expect improvement of the disease of your conscience; what if
Your Grace wants to save a path and easily put yourself in that of your
Salvation, come with me, I will teach you to be a knight errant,
where so many jobs and misadventures are spent that, taking them for
penance, on two palettes they will put you in heaven.
Roque laughed at the council of Don Quixote, to whom, changing conversation, he told the
tragic event of Claudia Jerónima, that it weighed heavily on Sancho, that
The beauty, ease, and spirit of the girl had not been bad for him.
At this, the squires of the prey arrived, bringing with them two
knights on horseback, and two pilgrims on foot, and a women's carriage with
up to six servants, who accompanied them on foot and on horseback, with two others
mule boys that the knights brought. The squires caught them in
half, keeping the losers and the victors great silence, waiting for the
great Roque Guinart spoke, who asked the gentlemen who
they were and where they were going, and what money they were carrying. One of them replied:
-Sir, we are two Spanish infantry captains; have
our companies in Naples and we are going to embark on four galleys, which
they say they are in Barcelona with an order to go to Sicily; we take up
two or three hundred escudos, with which, in our opinion, we go rich and
happy, because the ordinary narrowness of the soldiers does not allow greater
treasures.
Roque asked the pilgrims the same as the captains; fuele
answered that they were going to embark to go to Rome, and that between them
they could carry up to sixty reales. He also wanted to know who was in the
car, and where, and the money they were carrying; and one of the horsemen said:
-My lady, Mrs. Guiomar de Quiñones, wife of the regent of the Vicariate of
Naples, with a small daughter, a maid and an owner, are the ones who go in
Car; let us accompany her six servants, and the money is six hundred
shields.
"So," said Roque Guinart, "we already have nine hundred escudos here and
sixty reais; my soldiers must be up to sixty; look at how you
it fits each one, because I am a bad accountant.
When the robbers heard this, they raised their voices, saying:
- Long live Roque Guinart for many years, despite the threats that his downfall
seek!
The captains showed to be distressed, the lady regent was saddened, and did not
the pilgrims had nothing to do, seeing the confiscation of their property. Tuvolos
Roque suspended like this for a while, but he did not want his sadness to pass,
that could already be known at arquebus shot, and, turning to the captains,
said:
-You mercedes, gentlemen captains, out of courtesy, be served
lend me sixty escudos, and the lady runs eighty, to please
this squad that accompanies me, because the abbot, of what yanta sings, and
then you can go your way free and unprepared, with a passport
that I will give them, so that, if they meet other of some of my squads that
I have divided by these contours, do not hurt them; that is not my
intention to offend soldiers or any woman, especially those who
are main.
Infinite and well said were the reasons with which the captains
thanked Roque for his courtesy and liberality, which, for such they had it,
in leaving them their own money. Mrs. Guiomar de Quiñones loved herself
throw out of the car to kiss the feet and hands of the great Roque, but he
He did not consent to it in any way; before he asked for forgiveness of the wrong that
he did, forced to fulfill the precise obligations of his bad job.
The lady-regent commanded a servant of hers to then give the eighty escudos
that had been distributed to him, and the captains had already disbursed the
sixty. The pilgrims were going to give all their misery, but Roque told them that
they were staying, and turning to his own, he said:
-Of these shields, two touch each one, and there are twenty left over: the ten are given to each other.
these pilgrims, and the other ten to this good squire, because he can say
good of this adventure.
And, bringing him writing seasoning, which he was always supplied with, Roque
gave them a written pass for the majors of their squads, and,
saying goodbye to them, he let them go free, and admired by their nobility, their
gallant disposition and strange proceeding, having him more for an Alexander
Greater than a known thief. One of the squires said in his tongue
Gascon and Catalan:
-This our captain is more for frade than for bandit: yes from here
forward I would like to be liberal, be it with your property and not with the
our.
The unfortunate did not say it so much that Roque stopped hearing it, who,
reaching for his sword, he split his head almost in two parts,
telling him:
-In this way I punish the haggard and daring.
They were all amazed, and no one dared to speak to him: such was the obedience
that they had him.
Roque moved aside and wrote a letter to his friend, to Barcelona,
giving him notice how the famous Don Quixote de la Mancha was with him, that
errant knight of whom so many things were said; and what did you know that
He was the funniest and the most knowledgeable man in the world, and from there to
four days, which was that of Saint John the Baptist, he would be put in the middle of the
city ​​beach, armed with all his weapons, on Rocinante, his horse,
and his squire Sancho on a donkey, and to give news of this to his
the Niarros friends, so that they could solace themselves with him; that he would like me to
the Cadells, their opponents, lacked such taste, but that this was
impossible, because the follies and discretions of Don Quixote and the
grace of his squire Sancho Panza could not fail to give general pleasure to
all the world. He dispatched these letters to one of his squires, who, moving
the bandit suit in that of a farmer, entered Barcelona and gave it to
Who was going.
Chapter LXI. Of what happened to Don Quixote at the entrance to
Barcelona, ​​with other things that have more of what is true than what is
discreet
Three days and three nights Don Quixote was with Roque, and if he were
three hundred years, he will not lack what to look at and admire in the way of his life:
here they woke up, there they ate; sometimes they fled, not knowing from whom, and
others were waiting, without knowing who. They slept on their feet, interrupting the
dream, moving from one place to another. Everything was to put spies, to listen
sentries, blowing the strings of the arquebuses, although they brought few,
because they all used rocks. Roque spent his nights away from
theirs, in parts and places where they couldn't know where he was;
because the many sides that the visorrey of Barcelona had cast on his
life brought him restless and fearful, and he dared not trust anyone, fearing
that his own, or had to kill him, or deliver to justice: life,
by the way, miserable and annoying.
Finally, along unusual roads, by shortcuts and hidden paths, they left
Roque, Don Quixote and Sancho with six other squires to Barcelona. They arrived
to his beach on the eve of San Juan at night, and, embracing Roque to don
Quixote and Sancho, to whom he gave the promised ten shields, which until
Then he had not given them, he left them, with a thousand offers that from the
one to the other party were made.
Roque turned; Don Quixote stayed waiting for the day, like this, on horseback, like
it was, and it did not take long when it began to be discovered by the balconies of the
Orient the face of the white dawn, cheering the herbs and flowers, in
instead of gladdening the ear; although at the same moment they also made the
heard the sound of many shawms and drums, the noise of bells, ''
trap, separate, separate! '' from corridors, who, apparently, from the city
came out. The dawn gave rise to the sun, which, a face larger than that of a
rodela, by the lower horizon, little by little, it was rising.
Don Quixote and Sancho looked everywhere: they saw the sea,
hitherto unseen of them; It seemed very spacious and long, much more
that the Ruidera lagoons, which they had seen in La Mancha; saw the
galleys that were on the beach, which, knocking down the tents,
they discovered full of streamers and pennants, which fluttered in the wind and
they kissed and swept the water; inside bugles, trumpets and shawms sounded,
that near and far filled the air with soft and bellicose accents.
They began to move and skirmish through the calm waters,
corresponding to them almost in the same way infinite knights as of the city
on beautiful horses and in showy liveries they came out. The soldiers of the
galleys fired infinite artillery, to whom those who were
on the city walls and forts, and thick artillery with
dreadful roar broke the winds, to whom the cannons of
galleys creaking. The joyful sea, the joyful land, the clear air,
just maybe cloudy from the artillery smoke, it seems that it was infusing and
engendering sudden taste in all people.
Sancho could not imagine how those lumps could have so many feet
that moved by sea. In this, they came running, with shouts, lililies
and shout, those of the liveries where Don Quixote suspended and astonished
I was there, and one of them, who was Roque's advisor, said aloud to Don
Quixote:
-Welcome to our city the mirror, the lantern, the star and the
north of all the cavalry errant, where it is held the longest. Well
Let him come, I say, the brave Don Quixote de la Mancha: not the false one, not the
fictional, not the apocryphal that in false stories these days we have
shown, but the true, the legal and the faithful that Cide described to us
Hamete Benengeli, flower of historians.
Don Quixote did not answer a word, nor did the knights wait for the
respond, but, turning and stirring with the others who
They continued, they began to make a scrambled snail around Don Quixote;
who, turning to Sancho, said:
-These have known us well: I will bet they have read our history and
even the recently printed Aragonese one.
The gentleman who spoke to Don Quixote returned again and said:
-Your grace, Mr. Don Quixote, come with us, we are all
his servants and great friends of Roque Guinart.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-If courtesies engender courtesies, yours, sir knight, is a daughter or
very close relative of those of the great Roque. Take me wherever you want, that I
I will have no other will than yours, and more if you want to occupy it in
your service.
With words no less restrained than these answered the knight, and,
everyone enclosing him in the middle, to the sound of the shawms and the drums,
they walked with him to the city, entering from which, the bad guy, that everything
bad orders, and the boys, who are more bad than the bad, two of them
mischievous and daring entered by all the people, and, raising the one of
the tail of the rucio and the other that of Rocinante, they put them and fitted
two bunches of gorse. The poor animals felt the news
spurs, and, clenching their tails, they increased their disgust, so that,
giving a thousand bucks, they found their owners on the ground. Don Quixote, run and
affronted, he went to remove the plumage from the tail of his matalote, and Sancho,
that of his white. Those who led Don Quixote would like to punish the
daring of the boys, and it was not possible, because they locked themselves between
more than a thousand others who followed them.
Don Quixote and Sancho got back upstairs; with the same applause and music
They arrived at the house of their guide, which was large and main, well, like
rich gentleman; where we will leave you for now, because that is how Cide wants it
Hamete.
Chapter LXII. Which is about the adventure of the enchanted head, with other
trifles that can not stop counting
Don Antonio Moreno was called the guest of Don Quixote, a rich and
discreet, and a friend of being honest and affable, which, seeing in his
home to Don Quixote, was looking for ways, without his detriment, to get
square their follies; because it is not teasing that hurts, nor are there hobbies
that are worth if they are with third party damage. The first thing he did was do
disarm Don Quixote and expose him to his narrow and sheltered
dressed -as we have already described and painted- to a balcony that
I went out to one of the main streets of the city, in view of the
people and boys, who looked at him like a monkey. They ran again
in front of him those in liveries, as if for him alone, not to brighten that
festive day, they would have worn them; and Sancho was delighted, for
It seems to him that he had found, without knowing how or how not, other weddings of
Camacho, another house like Don Diego de Miranda's and another castle like the
the duke.
Some of his friends ate that day with Don Antonio, honoring all and
treating Don Quixote as a knight errant, from which, hollow and
pompous, there was no room for contentment. Sancho's gifts were so many,
that all the servants of the house and all
how many heard him. While at the table, Don Antonio said to Sancho:
-Here we have news, good Sancho, that you are such a friend of manjar blanco and
to lbondiguillas, which, if you have enough, you keep them in the bosom for the other
day.
`` No, sir, it is not like that, '' answered Sancho, `` because I am more clean than
greedy, and my lord Don Quixote, who is in front, knows well that with a fist
of acorns, or walnuts, we usually spend eight days between them. Truth is
that if perhaps they give me the heifer, I run with the rope;
I mean that I eat what they give me, and I use the times as I find them; and
Whoever said that I am an advanced eater and not clean,
Take it for granted that you are wrong; and in another way I would say this if I did not look
to the honest beards that are at the table.
"By the way," said Don Quixote, "that the parsimony and cleanliness with which Sancho
how it can be written and engraved on bronze plates, so that it remains in
eternal memory of the centuries to come. It is true that when he has
hungry, he seems somewhat greedy, because he eats quickly and chews on two cheeks;
but the cleaning always has it in its point, and in the time that it was
The governor learned to eat a picky eater: so much that he ate with a fork
the grapes and even the grains of the pomegranate.
-How! Don Antonio said. Was Sancho Governor?
"Yes," answered Sancho, "and from an island called the Barataria." Ten days the
I governed to ask of mouth; in them I lost my calm, and I learned to despise
all the governments of the world; I ran away from her, I fell into a cave, where
I thought I was dead, from which I came out alive by a miracle.
Don Quixote often recounted the whole success of Sancho's government, with which
it gave great pleasure to the listeners.
With the tablecloths lifted, and Don Antonio taking Don Quixote by the hand,
He entered a secluded room with him, in which there was nothing else of
ornament than a table, apparently of jasper, that on a foot of the same
held, on which it was placed, in the manner of the heads of
Roman emperors, from the breasts up, one that appeared to be of bronze.
Don Antonio walked with Don Quixote throughout the room, surrounding many
times the table, after which he said:
-Agora, Mr. Don Quixote, I am aware that you do not hear us and listen
one, and the door is closed, I want to tell at your mercy one of the
more rare adventures, or, better to say, novelties than imaginable can,
on the condition that what I say at your mercy must be deposited in the
last secret toilets.
`` I swear so, '' answered Don Quixote, `` and I'll still put a slab on it, to
more security; because I want your grace to know, Mr. Don Antonio
-who already knew his name-, who is talking to whom, although he has ears
to hear, he has no tongue to speak; so, surely you can
Thank you, transfer what is on your chest to mine and realize that
has thrown into the abysses of silence.
`` In compliance with that promise, '' answered Don Antonio, `` I want to put your
mercy in admiration of what I see and hear, and give me some relief from
the pain it causes me not to have someone with whom to communicate my secrets, which are not
to trust everyone.
Don Quixote was in suspense, waiting for so many
preventions. In this, Don Antonio taking her hand, walked it through the
head of bronze and all over the table, and for the jasper foot on which
He held, and then said:
-This head, Mr. Don Quixote, has been made and manufactured by one of the
greatest charmers and sorcerers the world has ever had, which I believe was
Polish nation and disciple of the famous Escotillo, of whom so many
wonders are told; which was here in my house, and for the price of a thousand
shields that I gave him, he carved this head, which has the property and virtue of
answer how many questions in the ear they ask. He saved directions, he painted
characters, observed stars, looked at points, and, finally, took it out with the
perfection that we will see tomorrow, because on Fridays it is silent, and today, that
is, it has to make us wait until tomorrow. In this time, your
Please beware of what you want to ask, which I know from experience
he tells the truth as soon as he answers.
Don Quixote was amazed by virtue and propriety of the head, and was
for not believing Don Antonio; but, to see how little time there was to do
experience, did not want to say anything else but thanked him for having
discovered such a great secret. They left the room, closed the door don
Antonio with the key, and they went to the room, where the other gentlemen
They were. At this time Sancho had told them many of the adventures and
events that had happened to his master.
That afternoon they took Don Quixote out for a walk, not armed, but in a rúa,
dressed in a sloop of tawny cloth, which could make you sweat in that
time at the same yelo. They ordered with their servants to entertain Sancho
so that they would not let him leave the house. Don Quixote was going, not about
Rocinante, but on a large male with a level gait, and very well dressed.
They put the sloop on him, and on his back, without his seeing it, they sewed him
a parchment, where they wrote in large letters: This is Don Quixote
of La Mancha. At the beginning of the walk, the label wore the eyes of how many
came to see him, and as they read: This is Don Quixote de la Mancha, they were amazed
Don Quixote to see that those who looked at him named and knew him; and,
Turning to Don Antonio, who was at her side, she said:
-Great is the prerogative that the errant cavalry encloses in itself, since
makes the one who professes it known and famous by all terms of the
Earth; If not, look at your grace, Mr. Don Antonio, that even the
The boys of this city, without ever having seen me, know me.
`` That's right, Mr. Don Quixote, '' answered Don Antonio, `` that, just like fire
it cannot be hidden and locked up, virtue cannot cease to be
known, and that which is achieved by the profession of arms shines and
it prevails over all the others.
So it happened that, as Don Quixote went with the applause that has been said, a
Castilian who read the label on the back, raised his voice, saying:
"Help the devil for Don Quixote de la Mancha!" How have you been up to here?
arrived, without having died the infinite clubs that you have on your back? You
you are crazy, and if you were alone and within the gates of your madness,
less bad; but you have the property of driving crazy and foolish
how many treat you and communicate; If not, look at it for these gentlemen who
accompany. Go back, fool, to your house, and look for your property, for your
wife and your children, and leave these emptiness that gnaws at your brain and
they skim the understanding.
`` Brother, '' said Don Antonio, `` go your way, and don't give advice to
who does not ask you. Mr. Don Quixote de la Mancha is very sane, and
we, who accompany him, are not fools; virtue is to be honored
Wherever I am, and walk in bad hours, and do not go where you do not
they call you.
-Pardiez, your grace is right -answered the Castilian-, that advise
to this good man it is to kick against the thorn; but, with all that, I
It is a very great pity that the good wit they say he has in all
things this fool will drain down the channel of his errant cavalry; and
the congratulations that your grace said, be it for me and for all my
descendants if from today more, although he lived longer than Methuselah,
advice to anyone, even if they ask me.
The counselor left; the walk went on; but the rush was so great
that the boys and all the people had reading the label, that he had
to remove Don Antonio, as if he was taking something else away from him.
Night came, they went home; There was a ladies' sarao, because the woman from
Don Antonio, who was a leading and cheerful lady, beautiful and discreet,
She invited other friends to come to honor her guest and to like
of his never seen follies. Some came, he had a splendid dinner and
The sarao began at almost ten o'clock at night. Among the ladies there were two
mischievous and mocking in taste, and, to be very honest, they were somewhat
decomposed, by giving rise to teasing without anger. Are
They were so quick to get Don Quixote to dance that they ground him, not
only the body, but the anima. It was a matter of seeing the figure of Don Quixote,
long, stretched, skinny, yellow, tight in dress, snubbed, and,
Above all, not anything light. The damsels demanded of him like theft, and he,
also like theft, he despised them; but, seeing himself pressed with compliments,
He raised his voice and said:
-Fugite, parts adverse !: leave me in my peace, ill-come thoughts.
There come to you, ladies, with your wishes, that she who is queen of the
mine, the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, does not consent that no one else who
yours overwhelm me and surrender.
And, saying this, he sat down in the middle of the room, on the floor, ground and
broken from such a dancing exercise. Don Antonio had them take him in
weight to his bed, and the first one to grasp it was Sancho, saying:
"Nora in such, lord our master, you have danced it!" Do you think that all
brave are dancers and all the errant knights dancers? Say
that if you think about it, that you are deceived; man there is who will dare to kill
to a giant rather than to caper. If you could stomp, I
I supplied your fault, that I stomp like a girifalte; but in the
dance, I do not stitch.
With these and other reasons, Sancho made the sarao laugh, and he found his
I love in bed, wrapping him up to sweat the coldness of his dance.
Another day it seemed to Don Antonio to be good to do the experience of the
enchanted head, and with Don Quixote, Sancho and two other friends, with both
ladies who had ground Don Quixote at the ball, that that very
The night they had stayed with Don Antonio's wife, he shut himself up in the
stay where the head was. He told them the property he had,
entrusted them with the secret and told them that this was the first day they had
to prove the virtue of such an enchanted head; and if they weren't the two friends
of Don Antonio, no other person knew the busilis of charm, and even if
Don Antonio would not have been discovered first to his friends, also
they will fall in the admiration in which the others fell, without being possible
Another thing: with such a trace and such order it was manufactured.
The first to reach the ear of the head was Don Antonio himself, and
he said in a submissive voice, but not so much that it was not understood by all:
-Tell me, head, for the virtue that is enclosed in you: what thoughts do I have
I now?
And the head answered him, without moving his lips, with a clear and distinct voice,
So it was understood by all, this reason:
-I don't judge from thoughts.
Hearing which, everyone was stunned, and more seeing that in the whole
room nor around the table there was no human person to answer
could.
-How many are we here? Don Antonio began to ask.
And it was answered by the tenor himself, step:
-You and your wife are here, with two of your friends, and two of her friends, and a
famous knight named Don Quixote de la Mancha, and a his squire who
Sancho Panza has by name.
Here it was the wonder again, here it was the bristling
hair to all of sheer fright! And, don Antonio turning away from his head,
said:
-This is enough to make me understand that I was not deceived by the one who
sold, wise head, talkative head, responsive and admirable head
head! Another one arrives and asks him what he wants.
And, as women are ordinarily quick and friendly to know, the
The first one to arrive was one of the two friends of Don Antonio's wife,
and what he asked was:
-Tell me, head, what will I do to be very beautiful?
And it was answered:
-Be very honest.
"I'm not asking you more," said the questioner.
Then the companion arrived and said:
-I would like to know, head, if my husband loves me well, or not.
And they replied:
-Look at the works he does for you, and you have to see him.
The married woman left saying:
-This answer did not need a question, because, in effect, the
works that are made declare the will of the one who does them.
Then one of Don Antonio's two friends arrived and asked him:
-Who I am?
And it was answered:
-You know it.
`` I am not asking you that, '' replied the knight, `` but tell me if I
know you.
"Yes, I know," they answered, "that you are Don Pedro Noriz."
-I do not want to know more, because this is enough to understand, oh head!
you know everything.
And, moving away, the other friend came and asked him:
-Tell me, head, what wishes does my son have for the mayorazgo?
`` I have already said, '' they answered, `` that I do not judge by wishes, but, nevertheless
That, I can tell you that those that your son has are to bury you.
`` That is it, '' said the knight, `` what I see through my eyes, with my finger I
he pointed.
And he asked no more. Don Antonio's wife came over and said:
-I don't know, head, what to ask you; I would only want to know about you if I will enjoy
many years of good husband.
And they replied:
-Yes you will enjoy, because their health and their temperance in living promise many
years of life, which many tend to shorten due to their lack of temper.
Then Don Quixote arrived and said:
-Tell me, the one who answers: was it true or was it a dream what I told me?
happened in the cave of Montesinos? Will the lashes of Sancho be true my
squire? Will Dulcinea's disenchantment have an effect?
"As for the cave," they answered, "there is much to say: it has everything; the
Sancho's lashes will go from space, Dulcinea's disenchantment will reach
due execution.
"I don't want to know more," said Don Quixote; that as I see Dulcinea
disenchanted, I will realize that all the fortunes that
I will be right to wish.
The last questioner was Sancho, and what he asked was:
- By chance, head, will I have another government? Will I get out of the narrowness of
squire? Will I see my wife and children again?
To which they replied:
-You will rule in your house; and if you return to her, you will see your wife and your
sons; and, ceasing to serve, you will cease to be a squire.
"Well, God!" -said Sancho Panza-. This I told me: I would not say more
the prophet Perogrullo.
"Beast," said Don Quixote, "what do you want them to answer you?" Isn't it enough that
the answers that this head has given correspond to what is
question?
`` Yes, that's enough, '' answered Sancho, `` but I would like him to declare himself more and
say more.
With this the questions and the answers are over, but the
admiration in which all were left, except the two friends of Don Antonio,
that the case knew. Which Cide Hamete Benengeli wanted to declare later, for
not have suspense to the world, believing that some sorcerer and extraordinary
mystery in such a head was enclosed; and thus, it says that Don Antonio Moreno,
in imitation of another head that he saw in Madrid, made by a printer,
he did this at home, to entertain himself and suspend the ignorant; and the
The factory was like this: the table top was made of wood, painted and
varnished as jasper, and the foot on which it was supported was the same, with
four eagle claws that came out of it, for greater firmness of the weight. The
head, which looked like a medal and figure of a Roman emperor, and the color of
bronze, it was all hollow, and neither more nor less the table of the table, in which
It fit so tightly that no joint sign looked alike. The foot of
The table was hollow anxiety, which responded to the throat and breasts of the
head, and all this came to answer another room below the
head stay was. All over this hollow foot, table, throat and
breasts of the medal and the figure referred to was heading a cannon made of
can, very fair, that nobody could be seen. In the room below
corresponding to the one above, the one who had to answer was
mouth with the same barrel, so that, like a blowpipe, the voice of
top to bottom and bottom to top, in articulate and clear words; and of this
way it was not possible to know the lie. A nephew of Don Antonio,
sharp and discreet student, was the respondent; which, being warned
of his lord's uncle of those who were to enter with him on that day in the
headroom, it was easy for him to respond promptly and punctually to
The first question; to the others he responded by conjecture, and, as
discreet, discreet. And Cide Hamete says more: that up to ten or twelve days
this wonderful machine lasted; but what, spreading through the city that don
Antonio had an enchanted head in his house, that to those who asked him
he replied, fearing it might not reach the ears of the awake sentinels of
our Faith, having declared the case to the Inquisitors,
they ordered him to undo it and not pass later, because the common people
ignorant do not be scandalized; but in the opinion of Don Quixote and
Sancho Panza, the head was delighted and responsive, more to
satisfaction of Don Quixote than of Sancho.
The gentlemen of the city, for pleasing Don Antonio and for entertaining
Don Quixote and allow him to discover his nonsense, ordered to run
ring from there to six days; that had no effect for the occasion to be said
ahead. He gave Don Quixote a chance to walk the city on the plain and on foot,
fearing that, if he went on horseback, the mochachos would chase him, and
Thus, he and Sancho, with two other servants that don Antonio gave him, went out to
walk.
It so happened that, going down a street, Don Quixote raised his eyes and saw
written on a door, in very large letters: Books are printed here;
of which he was very happy, because until then he had not seen a press
some, and he wanted to know what it was like. He went inside, with all his
accompaniment, and saw pulling in one part, correcting in another, composing in
this, to mend in that one, and, finally, all that machine that in the
large enterprises is shown. Don Quixote came to a drawer and asked
what was it that was done there; the officers gave him account, he was astonished
and passed on. He came to one in others, and asked him what he was doing.
The officer replied:
-Sir, this gentleman here he is -and he taught a man of very good
size and look and some seriousness - has translated a Tuscan book into
our Spanish language, and I'm composing, to give the
stamp.
-What title does the book have? asked Don Quixote.
-To which the author replied:
"Sir, the book, in Tuscan, is called Le Bagatelle."
-And what does the trifle answer him in our Spanish? asked Don Quixote.
-Le trifle -said the author- it is as if in Castilian we say the
toys; and, although this book is in the humble name, it contains and
it contains very good and substantial things.
`` I, '' said Don Quixote, `` know some as much about the Tuscan, and I pride myself on singing
some rooms in the Ariosto. But tell me your mercy, my lord, and no
I say this because I want to examine the ingenuity of your worship, but rather
curiosity no more: have you ever found the name piñata in your writing?
"Yes, many times," replied the author.
-And how does your grace translate it in Spanish? asked Don Quixote.
"How was he to translate it," replied the author, "if not saying pot?"
"Such a body," said Don Quixote, "and how far ahead is your grace in the
Tuscan language! I'll bet a good bet that where it says in the Tuscan
piache, says your mercy in the Castilian place; and where it says più, it says
more, and the su declares with above, and the giù with below.
`` Yes, I do declare, by the way, '' said the author, `` because those are their own
correspondences.
`` I will swear, '' said Don Quixote, `` that your mercy is not known in the
world, always an enemy of rewarding flowery wits and laudable
works. What skills are lost out there! What ingenuity
cornered! What virtues despised! But, with all this, I
It seems that translating from one language into another, unless it is from the queens of
languages, Greek and Latin, is like someone looking at Flemish tapestries
the reverse, which, although the figures are seen, are full of threads that
they darken, and are not seen with the smoothness and complexion of the upper part; and the translating of
easy tongues, nor does he argue wit or elocution, any more than he who
nor the one who copies a role from another role translates. And not for this I want
infer that this exercise of translating is not commendable; because in others
worse things could be occupied by man, and that less profit would bring him.
Out of this account are the two famous translators: the one, the doctor
Cristóbal de Figueroa, in his Pastor Fido, and the other, Don Juan de Jáurigui,
in his Aminta, where they happily question which is the translation or which is the
original. But tell me your mercy: this book, can you print yourself,
Or have you already sold the privilege to a bookseller?
`` I print it on my own, '' replied the author, `` and I plan to earn a thousand ducats,
at least, with this first impression, which must be two thousand bodies,
and they have to be dispatched at six reales each, in daca the straws.
-Good mercy on the account! Don Quixote answered. Well it seems
who does not know the inputs and outputs of printers, and the
correspondences between one another; I promise you that when you see
loaded with two thousand bodies of books, I saw his body so crushed, that he
scary, and more if the book is a bit naughty and not spicy at all.
-Well, what? said the author. Would your grace want me to give it to a
bookseller, give me three maravedís for the privilege, and still think that
Will you be gracious in giving them to me? I do not print my books to achieve fame in the
world, that I am already known in it for my works: profit I want, that without it
good fame is not worth a quad.
"God give your mercy a good right," replied Don Quixote.
And he went forward to another drawer, where he saw that they were correcting a sheet
from a book called Luz del alma; and, seeing him, said:
-These such books, although there are many of this genre, are the ones to be
print, because many sinners are used, and they need
infinite lights for so many dim ones.
He stepped forward and saw that they were also correcting another book; and,
Asking its title, they answered that it was called the Second Part of the
Ingenious Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha, composed of a certain resident of
Tordesillas.
`` I already have news of this book, '' said Don Quixote, `` and in truth and in my
conscience that I thought was already burned and powdered, for
impertinent; but his Saint Martin will come to him, like every pig, that
fake stories are as good and delightful as they arrive
to the truth or the similarity of it, and the true ones are as much better as
they are more true.
And, saying this, with signs of some spite, he left the shop.
And that very day Don Antonio ordered him to take him to see the galleys that
they were on the beach, that Sancho rejoiced a lot, because in his life
I had seen them. Don Antonio warned the cuatralbo of the galleys like that
Later, the famous Don Quixote of the
Mancha, of whom already the cuatralbo and all the residents of the city had
News; and what happened in them will be told in the next chapter.
Chapter LXIII. Of how badly it happened to Sancho Panza with the visit of the
galleys, and the new adventure of the beautiful Moorish
Great were the speeches that Don Quixote made about the response of the
enchanted head, without any of them giving the lie, and all
they stopped with the promise, which he had by the way, of Dulcinea's disenchantment.
There he came and went, and rejoiced with himself, believing that he would see
I give its fulfillment; and Sancho, although he hated being governor, as
It is said, he still wanted to command and be obeyed again; what's up
bad luck brings with it the command, even if it is ridiculed.
In resolution, that afternoon Don Antonio Moreno, his guest, and his two
friends, with Don Quixote and Sancho, went to the galleys. The cuatralbo, which
was advised of his welcome, to see the two so famous Don Quixote and
Sancho, they barely reached the navy, when all the galleys shot down
shop, and the shawms sounded; then they threw the skiff into the water,
covered in rich crimson velvet rugs and pillows, and in
As Don Quixote put his feet on it, the captain fired the cannon
of the bay, and the other galleys did the same, and when Don Quixote came up
down the right scale, all the mob greeted him as is customary when a
lead person walks into the galley, saying, "Huh huh huh!"
times. The general shook his hand, we will call him by this name, which was
a main Valencian gentleman; He embraced Don Quixote, saying:
-This day I will mark with a white stone, for being one of the best
I intend to carry in my life, having seen Mr. Don Quixote de la Mancha:
time and sign that shows us that all the value is enclosed and encrypted
of the errant cavalry.
With other no less courteous reasons, Don Quixote answered him happily.
too much to see yourself treat the lord so much. They all entered the stern, who
It was very well dressed, and they sat down by the bandins, the commander passed by
in the corridor, and he signaled with his whistle that the mob should make clothes,
did in an instant. Sancho, who saw so many people naked, was stunned,
and more when he saw shop with such a hurry, that it seemed to him that
all the devils were there working; but this was all cakes and
Painted bread for what I will say now. Sancho was sitting on the
shelf, next to the back of the right hand, which already warned of what
what to do, he took hold of Sancho, and, lifting him in his arms, the whole
mob stood up and alert, starting from the right wing, gave him
and turning on the arms of the mob from bench to bench, with so much
haste, that poor Sancho lost the sight of his eyes, and without a doubt thought
that the demons themselves were taking him away, and they did not stop with him until
the sinister band and put him in the stern. The poor ground was left, and panting,
and trasudando, without being able to imagine what happened to him.
Don Quixote, who saw Sancho's wingless flight, asked the general if
ceremonies were those that were used with the first to enter the
galleys; because if it were, he, who had no intention of professing
in them, he did not want to do such exercises, and that he voted to God that,
if someone came to grab him to turn him over, that he would take out the soul of
lace-ups; and, saying this, he rose to his feet and drew his sword.
At this moment they brought down the tent, and with a great noise they dropped the
entena from high to low. Sancho thought that the sky was dislodging from its
kicks and came to hit his head; and, overwhelming her, full of fear, the
put between the legs. Don Quixote did not have them all with him; that also
he shuddered and shrugged, losing the color of his face. The mob
he raised the entena with the same haste and noise that had lessened it, and all
this, silent, as if they had no voice or breath. The commander signaled
let the iron set sail, and, jumping in the middle of the bay with the cork or
rebenque, began to piss off the backs of the mob, and
little to sea. When Sancho saw one move so many red feet that
Such did he think the oars were, he said among themselves:
"These are truly enchanted things, and not what my master says.
What have these wretches done, that they crave them, and how this man
alone, who walks around here whistling, has the audacity to whip so many
people? Now I say that this is hell, or at least purgatory.
Don Quixote, who saw the attention with which Sancho was watching what was happening,
said:
-Ah Sancho friend, and with what brevity and how cheaply could you,
if you want, undress half-length up, and put yourself between these
gentlemen, and end Dulcinea's disenchantment! Well with misery and sorrow
of so many, you would not feel yours much; and more, it could be that
the wise Merlin took into account each blow of these, for being given of good
hand, for ten of which you finally have to give.
The general wanted to ask what the lashes were, or what disenchantment with
Dulcinea, when the sailor said:
-Monjuí makes a signal that there is a rowboat on the coast on the side of the
west.
Heard this, the general jumped into the bay, and said:
-Hey children, don't go away! Some cargo brigantine in Algiers must have
be this one that the watchtower points out to us.
Then the other three galleys came to the captain, who knows what
ordered them. The general ordered the two to go out to sea, and he with the
another would go land to land, because then the ship would not escape them. Squeezed
the mob at the oars, propelling the galleys with such fury that it seemed
that were flying. Those who went out to sea, within two miles, discovered
a vessel, who with their eyes marked him by up to fourteen or fifteen
banks, and that was the truth; which vessel, when he discovered the galleys,
he set out on the hunt, with the intention and hope of escaping because of his lightness;
But tell him badly, because the captain's galley was one of the lightest vessels
that they sailed in the sea, and thus it was entering him, that clearly those of the
brig they knew they could not escape; and thus, the arráez would like
put down their oars and surrender, lest they irritate the captain who
our galleys ruled. But luck, which otherwise guided him,
ordered that, since the captain came so close that the ship could
hear the voices from her telling them to surrender, two toraquís, who
is like saying two drunken Turks, who in the brig came with these
twelve, they fired two shotguns, with which they killed two soldiers who
they came on our dumps. Seeing which, the general swore not
leave alive all those in the vessel took, and, coming to ram
in all fury, it slipped out from under the palatine. Galley passed
go a long way; those of the vessel were lost, they sailed in
so much so that the galley returned, and again, sailing and rowing, they
hunting; but their diligence did not benefit them as much as their
daring, because, with the captain reaching them just over half a mile,
he threw the palamenta on them and took them all alive.
In this the other two galleys arrived, and all four with the prey
they returned to the beach, where infinite people were waiting for them, eager
to see what they brought. The general bottomed out near the ground, and learned that
the viceroy of the city was in the navy. He ordered the skiff to be
bring him, and ordered to subside the entena to hang later then the arráez and
the other Turks he had caught in the vessel, which would be up to thirty-two
six people, all dashing, and the most, Turkish gunmen. Asked the
general who was the arráez of the brig and was answered by one of the
captives, in Castilian language, which later seemed to be a renegade Spanish:
-This young man, sir, you see here is our arráez.
And he showed him one of the most handsome and dashing young men who could paint the
human imagination. The age, it seemed, was less than twenty years.
The general asked him:
-Tell me, badly advised dog, who moved you to kill me my soldiers, then
did you see escape being impossible? Is that respect for the captains?
Don't you know that recklessness is not bravery? Doubtful hopes must
make men daring, but not reckless.
Answer wanted the arráez; but the general could not, at that time, hear the
answer, by going to greet the viceroy, who was already entering the galley, with
which some of his servants and some people of the town entered.
"Good hunting has been, Senor General!" said the viceroy.
"And so good," replied the general, "that Your Excellency will see it now.
hanging from this entena.
-How did I? replied the viceroy.
`` Because they have killed me, '' replied the general, `` against all law and against all
reason and manners of war, two of the best soldiers in these galleys
came, and I have sworn to hang all I have captivated, mainly
this young man, who is the arráez of the brig.
And he taught the one whose hands were already tied and the string
throat, waiting for death.
The viceroy looked at him, and, seeing him so beautiful, and so gallant, and so humble,
giving her at that moment a letter of recommendation of her beauty, it came to her
desire to excuse his death; and thus, he asked:
-Tell me, Arráez, are you a Turkish nation, or a Moor, or a renegade?
To which the waiter replied, in the same Castilian language:
-I am not a Turkish national, nor a Moor, nor a renegade.
-Well, what are you? replied the viceroy.
"Christian woman," replied the young man.
-Woman and Christian, and in such a dress and in such steps? More is a thing for
to admire it than to believe it.
`` Suspend, '' said the waiter, `` oh gentlemen, the execution of my death,
much will be lost as your revenge is delayed as long as I
count my life.
Who was the one with such a hard heart that with these reasons he would not soften,
or, at least, until hearing what the sad and hurt young man say
wanted? The general told him to say what he wanted, but not to wait
achieve forgiveness of your known guilt. With this license, the waiter began to
say this way:
- «Of that nation more wretched than prudent, on whom it has rained
these days a sea of ​​misfortunes, I was born, of Moorish fathers engendered. On
the current of his misfortune was me by two uncles of mine taken to Barbary,
without taking advantage of me to say that I was a Christian, as, indeed, I am, and
not of the feigned or apparent, but of the true and Catholic. Not me
it was worth, with those who were in charge of our miserable exile, to say this
true, not even my uncles wanted to believe it; before they had her for a lie and for
invention to stay in the land where I was born, and thus, by force
more than by degree, they took me with them. I had a Christian mother and a father
discreet and Christian, neither more nor less; I sucked the Catholic faith into milk;
raise me with good manners; neither in the language nor in them ever, to me
It seemed, I gave signs of being Moorish. At the same time and pace with these virtues, which
I think they are, my beauty grew, if I have any; and, although
my modesty and my confinement was a lot, it shouldn't have been so much that
a young gentleman, named Don Gaspar Gregorio, had the place to see me,
he was the son of a gentleman who, next to our place, has another of his.
How he saw me, how we talked to each other, how he saw himself lost by me and how I did not
won by him, it would be long to tell, and more in time that I am dreading
that, between the tongue and the throat, the rigorous cord has to be crossed
that threatens me; and so, I will only say how in our exile he wanted
accompany me Don Gregorio. Mixed with the Moors than from other places
they went out, because he knew the language very well, and on the trip he became friends with
two uncles of mine that I got brought me; because my father, prudent and forewarned,
just as the first party of our exile heard, they left the place and
He went to look for someone in the strange kingdoms to welcome us. Let
locked up and buried, in a part of which I alone have news,
many pearls and stones of great value, with some monies in crusades and
gold doubloons. He commanded me not to touch the treasure that he left in any
way, if we were banished before he came back. I did so, and with
my uncles, as I have said, and other relatives and friends we went to
Barbary; and the place where we made a seat was in Algiers, as if
we would do in the same hell. The king heard of my beauty, and
He made him famous for my riches, which, in part, was my luck. Call me
in front of him, he asked me what part of Spain he was from and what money and what jewels
brought. I told him the place, and that the jewels and money were left in it
buried, but that could easily be charged if I returned myself
for them. All this I told him, afraid that my beauty would not blind him,
but their greed. Being with me in these talks, they came to say
how one of the most gallant and beautiful young men
could imagine. Later I understood that they were saying it by Don Gaspar Gregorio, whose
beauty is left behind the greatest ones that can be made more expensive. Trouble me
considering the danger that Don Gregorio ran, because among those
Turkish barbarians in more than one has and esteems a handsome mochacho or young man who
a woman, however beautiful she is. Then the king ordered that
there to see him, and he asked me if it was true what about that young man
they were saying. Then I, almost as if warned from heaven, told him that it was;
but that it let him know that he was not a man, but a woman like me, and that
She begged me to let her go and dress in her natural dress, so that everything in
everything showed its beauty and with less embarrassment appeared in its presence.
He told me that it was in good time, and that another day we would talk in the way that
you could have it so that I could return to Spain to take out the hidden treasure.
I spoke with Don Gaspar, I told him about the danger in showing himself to be a man;
dressed him in blackberry, and that same afternoon I brought him into the presence of the king, the
which, seeing him, was amazed and made the distinction of keeping it to make
present from it to the Great Lord; and, to flee the danger that in the seraglio of
his wives could have and fear of himself, he had her put in the home of some
main blackberries to keep and serve it, where they took it
later. What we both feel (that I can't deny that I don't love him) is
leave to the consideration of those who withdraw even if they love each other. Gave then
the king plans that I return to Spain in this brig and that I
accompanied by two national Turks, who were the ones who killed your
soldiers. This Spanish renegade also came with me - pointing to the one
had spoken first -, of which I know well that he is a disguised Christian and
who comes with more desire to stay in Spain than to return to Barbary; the
The other rabble of the brig are Moors and Turks, who are of no more use than
rowing rowing. The two Turks, greedy and insolent, without keeping the
order that we brought that to me and this renegade in the first part of
Spain, in the habit of Christians, with which we come provided, they would throw us into
land, first they wanted to sweep this coast and make some dam, yeah
might, fearing that if they first threw us on the ground, by some accident
if it happened to both of us, we might discover that the brig was left
in the sea, and if there were galleys on this coast, they would take them. Last night
we discovered this beach, and, without having news of these four galleys,
we were discovered, and what you have seen has happened to us. In resolution:
Don Gregorio remains in the habit of a woman among women, with manifest danger
of getting lost, and I see my hands tied, waiting, or, to put it better,
fearing to lose my life, which already tires me. " This is, gentlemen, the end of me
regrettable story, as true as it is unhappy; what I beg of you is that
let me die as a Christian, because, as I have already said, in nothing have I
been guilty of the guilt into which those of my nation have fallen.
And then he fell silent, his eyes filled with tender tears, whom they accompanied
many of those present were. The viceroy, tender and compassionate, without
speak a word to her, he reached out to her and removed with his hands the string that
the beautiful ones of the blackberry linked.
In as much, then, that the Christian Moorish her pilgrim story was about,
an old pilgrim who entered the galley had his eyes fixed on her
when the viceroy entered; and, as soon as the Moorish woman ended her talk, when
He threw himself at their feet, and, embracing them, with interrupted words of
a thousand sobs and sighs, he said:
-Oh Ana Félix, my unfortunate daughter! I am your father Ricote, who returned to
look for you for not being able to live without you, you are my soul.
To whose words Sancho opened his eyes, and raised his head
had, thinking of the misfortune of his walk), and, looking at the pilgrim,
knew to be the same Ricote who ran into the day he left his government, and
It was confirmed that this was his daughter, who, already unleashed, hugged her
father, mixing his tears with his; which he said to the general and to the
viceroy:
"This, gentlemen, is my daughter, more unhappy in her events than in her name."
Ana Félix is ​​called, with the nickname of Ricote, famous both for her
beauty as well as my wealth. I left my homeland to search kingdoms
strangers who lodged and gathered us, and, having found him in
Germany, I returned in this pilgrim habit, in the company of other Germans,
to look for my daughter and to unearth many riches that I left hidden. No
I found my daughter; I found the treasure, which I bring with me, and now, for the
Strange detour that you have seen, I have found the treasure that enriches me the most,
which is my dear daughter. If our little guilt and your tears and mine,
by the integrity of your justice, they can open doors to
Mercy, use it on us, we never thought of
offend, nor do we agree in any way with the intention of ours,
that they have just been exiled.
Then Sancho said:
-I know Ricote well, and I know what he says about being Ana is true
Felix his daughter; that in these other quibbles of coming and going, having good or bad
intention, I don't interfere.
All present admired by the strange case, the general said:
-One by one your tears will not let me fulfill my oath: live,
beautiful Ana Félix, the years of life that heaven has determined for you, and
the insolent and daring who committed it bear the penalty of their guilt.
And then he had the two Turks, who had his two soldiers, hanged from the entena
They had died; but the viceroy asked him earnestly not to hang them,
for more madness than bravery had been his. Did the general do what the
Viceroy asked him, because cold blood revenge is not executed well.
They then tried to trace a way to get Don Gaspar Gregorio out of danger in
What stay. Ricote offered for it more than two thousand ducats than in pearls
and in jewels he had. Many means were given, but none was such as the one
gave the Spanish renegade that has been said, who offered to return to
Algiers in some small boat, up to six banks, armed with rowers
Christians, because he knew where, how and when he could and should disembark,
and likewise he was not unaware of the house where Don Gaspar was staying. They doubted the general
and the viceroy to trust the renegade, nor to trust the Christians who had
to row the oar; fióle Ana Félix, and Ricote, his father, said that he went out to give
the rescue of the Christians, should they ever get lost.
Signed, then, in this opinion, the viceroy disembarked, and Don Antonio
Moreno took the Moorish woman and her father with him, commissioning the viceroy
that he gave them away and caressed as much as possible; what on your part
He offered whatever was in his house for his gift. So much was the benevolence
and charity that the beauty of Ana Félix instilled in his chest.
Chapter LXIV. Which is about the adventure that gave Don the most grief
Quixote of how many until then had happened to him
Don Antonio Moreno's wife tells the story that he received great
happy to see Ana Félix at home. He received it with great pleasure, as well
in love with her beauty as well as her discretion, because in the one and the
Another was the Moorish woman, and all the people of the city, like a bell
tolled, they came to see her.
Don Quixote said to Don Antonio that the opinion they had taken in the
Don Gregorio's freedom was not good, because it was more dangerous than
convenient, and that it would be better if they put him in Barbary with his
weapons and horse; that he would take out despite all the morisma, as he had
Don Gaiferos made to his wife Melisendra.
`` Warn your grace, '' said Sancho, hearing this, `` that Mr. Don Gaiferos
He took his wife off the mainland and brought her to France on the mainland;
but here, if we remove Don Gregorio, we have nowhere to bring him to
Spain, because the sea is in the middle.
"There is a remedy for everything, if not for death," replied Don Quixote;
Well, when the ship arrives at the marina, we can embark on it, although
everyone prevents it.
"It paints it very well and makes your grace easier," said Sancho, "but from the saying
In fact, there is a long way, and I abide by the renegade, who seems very
a good man with very good entrails.
Don Antonio said that if the renegade did not succeed in the case, he would take the
waiting for the great Don Quixote to pass in Barbary.
In two days the renegade left in a light ship with six oars for
gang, armed with the most courageous rabble; and from there to two others the
galleys to the Levant, the general having asked the visor-king to be
notify him of what happened in the freedom of Don Gregorio and in the case of
Ana Felix; the visorrey was left to do it as requested.
And one morning, don Quixote going out to stroll along the beach armed with all
his weapons, because, as he often said, they were his harness, and his
He rested fighting, and he was not without them a point, he saw coming towards him
a knight, also armed to the nines, bearing on his shield
painted a glowing moon; which, reaching a distance that could
be heard, in loud voices, directing his reasons to Don Quixote, he said:
-Insignal gentleman and never as Don Quixote de la Mancha should be praised,
I am the Knight of the White Moon, whose unprecedented feats may
they will have brought to mind. I come to contend with you and to test the strength
of your arms, in order to make you know and confess that my lady, is
Whoever she is, she is without comparison more beautiful than your Dulcinea del Toboso; the
which truth if you confess it from plain to plain, you will excuse your death and the
work that I have to take in giving it to you; and if you fight and I defeat you,
I do not want any other satisfaction but that, by laying down your arms and refraining from
seek adventures, pick yourself up and retire to your place for a period of one year,
where you have to live without reaching for the sword, in quiet peace and
profitable tranquility, because thus it is convenient for the increase of your
salvation of your soul; and if you defeat me, it will be at your discretion my
head, and the spoils of my weapons and horse will be yours, and it will pass to the
Yours the fame of my deeds. See what is best for you, and answer me later,
because today all day I bring term to dispatch this business.
Don Quixote was suspended and astonished, thus by the arrogance of the Knight of
the White Moon as the cause for which it defied him; and with rest and gesture
severe replied:
-Knight of the White Moon, whose exploits until now have not reached me
news, I will dare to swear that you have never seen the illustrious Dulcinea; that
If you had seen it, I know you would try not to put yourself in this demand,
because your sight will disappoint you that there has not been and cannot be beauty
that with hers it can be compared; and thus, not telling you that you lie, but
that you are not correct in what is proposed, with the conditions that you have referred,
I accept your challenge, and then, because the day you bring
determined; and I only exceed the conditions that the
fame of your exploits, because I do not know what or what such they are: with the
I am happy, such as they are. So take the part of the field
that you want, that I will do the same, and to whom God will give it, Saint
Pedro bless you.
They had discovered the Knight of the White Moon from the city, and told him so
to the visorrey who was speaking with Don Quixote de la Mancha. The visorrey,
believing it would be some new adventure manufactured by Don Antonio Moreno, or
for another some gentleman of the city, then went to the beach with gift
Antonio and with many other gentlemen who accompanied him, in time when
Don Quixote returned the reins to Rocinante to take what
necessary.
Seeing, then, the king-sight that the two signs gave of turning to
find, he got in the way, asking them what was the cause that moved them
to do so suddenly battle. The Knight of the White Moon replied
that it was precedence of beauty, and in brief reasons he said the same
that he had said to Don Quixote, with the acceptance of the conditions of the
challenge made by both parties. The visorrey came to Don Antonio, and
asked him if he knew who this Knight of the White Moon was, or if
it was some mockery they wanted to make of Don Quixote. Don Antonio replied
that he didn't even know who he was, nor if the challenge was actually teasing or really.
This answer had the visor-king perplexed as to whether or not he would let them pass.
forward in battle; but, not being able to persuade that it was but
mocking, he turned away saying:
Gentlemen, if there is no other remedy here but to confess or die, and
Mr. Don Quixote is in his thirteen and your mercy is La Blanca
Moon at fourteen, at the hand of God, and dense.
He thanked the White Moon with courteous and discreet reasons to the visorrey
the license they were given, and Don Quixote did the same; which,
entrusting himself to heaven with all his heart and to his Dulcinea - as he
custom at the beginning of the battles that were offered to him-, he returned to take
a little more from the field, because he saw that his opposite was doing the same, and, without
to play the trumpet or any other instrument of war that would give them a signal to attack,
They both returned the reins to their horses at the same point; and how
that of the White Moon was lighter, it reached Don Quixote at two thirds
career steps, and there he found him with such mighty strength, without
touch him with the spear (which he raised it, apparently, on purpose), which gave
with Rocinante and Don Quixote on the ground a dangerous fall. Was then
on him, and, putting the spear on his visor, said to him:
"You are vanquished, knight, and even dead, if you do not confess the conditions of
our challenge.
Don Quixote, ground and stunned, without raising his visor, as if he were speaking
Inside a tomb, in a weak and sick voice, he said:
-Dulcinea del Toboso is the most beautiful woman in the world, and I am the
unfortunate gentleman of the earth, and it is not good that my weakness disappoint
this truth. Squeeze, knight, the spear, and take my life, for you have
honor removed.
`` That is not what I will do, by the way, '' said the one with the White Moon, `` live, live in your
the fame of the beauty of Mrs. Dulcinea del Toboso, who only
I am happy that the great Don Quixote retires to his place for a year, or
until the time commanded by me, as we agreed before
enter this battle.
All this was heard by the visorrey and Don Antonio, with many others who were there
They were there, and they also heard that Don Quixote replied that as he did not ask
Whatever was to the detriment of Dulcinea, everything else would comply as
punctual and true gentleman.
Having made this confession, he returned the reins of the White Moon, and, making
measured with his head to the viewer king, at a canter he entered the city.
The visorrey sent Don Antonio to go after him, and that in any case
knew who he was. They picked up Don Quixote, uncovered his face, and
They found him colorless and leaking. Rocinante, purely badly, could not
move by then. Sancho, all sad, all sorry, did not know what
tell himself or what to do: it seemed to him that all this event happened in dreams and
that this whole machine was a thing of enchantment. He saw his lord surrendered
and obliged not to take up arms for a year; imagined the light of the glory of his
feats darkened, the hopes of his new promises undone, as
the smoke melts with the wind. I was afraid if it would be narrow or not
Rocinante, or dislocated his master; that it was no small fortune if dislocated
will remain. Finally, with a sedan chair, which the king visor had brought,
They took him to the city, and the king visor turned to her too, with longing
to know who the Knight of the White Moon was, who in such a bad mood
he had left don Quixote.
Chapter LXV. Where the news is given who was the White Moon, with the
freedom of Don Gregorio, and other events
Don Antonio Moreno followed the Knight of the White Moon, and they followed him
also, and even persecuted him, many boys, until they closed him in
an inn within the city. Don Antonio entered with a desire to meet him;
A squire came out to meet him and disarm him; locked himself in a low room, and
with him Don Antonio, who did not bake his bread until he knew who it was.
Seeing, then, the one with the White Moon that that gentleman would not let him,
said:
-I know well, sir, what you are coming to, which is to know who I am; and, because there is no
why deny it to you, as long as this my servant disarms me I will tell you, without
missing a point to the truth of the case. Know, sir, that they call me the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco; I am from the same place as Don Quixote de la Mancha,
whose madness and nonsense moves us to feel sorry for all those who
we know, and among those who have had it the most I have been; and, believing that
your health is in your rest and in that you are in your land and in your home, say
trace to make you be in it; and so, there will be three months that I left the
I walk like a knight errant, calling myself the Knight of Mirrors, with
intention to fight with him and defeat him, without hurting him, putting
condition of our fight that the defeated be at the discretion of the
victor; and what I thought to ask of him, because I already judged him for expired,
was to return to its place and not leave it for a whole year, in the
what time could it be cured; but luck ordered it differently,
because he beat me and knocked me off the horse, and thus, my
thought: he went on his way, and I turned, defeated, run and
grinding from the fall, which was also dangerous; but not for this it was taken away from me
the desire to return to look for him and to defeat him, as has been seen today. And like him
is so punctual in keeping the orders of the errant cavalry, no doubt
some will keep the one I have given her, in fulfillment of her word. This is,
Sir, what happens, without me having to tell you anything else; beg you
do not discover me or tell Don Quixote who I am, because they have an effect
good thoughts of mine and a man who
He is beautiful, as the nonsense of the cavalry leaves him.
`` Oh sir, '' said Don Antonio, `` God forgive you for the wrong you have done.
to everyone in wanting to make the funniest madman in him sane!
Do you not see, sir, that no benefit may come from the sanity of
Don Quixote, what is the pleasure he gives with his ravings? But I
I imagine that the entire industry of Mr. Bachelor has not to be part of
make a man so completely insane sane; and if it were not against
charity, I would say that Don Quixote never heals, because with his health,
we only lose his graces, but those of Sancho Panza, his squire, who
any of them can rejoice the same melancholy. With everything
this, I will shut up, and I will not tell him anything, to see if I come out true in suspecting
that the diligence made by Mr. Carrasco will not have any effect.
Who replied that one by one that business was in good shape,
who expected happy success. And, don Antonio having offered to do what
who else sent him, said goodbye to him; and, had their weapons rolled over a
male, then at the same point, on the horse with which he entered the battle,
left the city that same day and returned to his homeland, without
something happen to him that forces him to tell it in this true story.
Don Antonio told the visorrey everything that Carrasco had told him,
that the visorrey did not receive much pleasure, because in the gathering of don
Quixote was missing the one that all those who of their follies could have
have news.
Don Quixote was in bed for six days, husky, sad, pensive and ill
conditioned, going back and forth with the imagination in the unfortunate event
of its expiration. Sancho consoled him, and, among other reasons, said:
-My Lord, raise your head and rejoice, if you can, and give
thank heaven that, since it knocked him down to earth, he did not come out with any
broken rib; and, well, they know that where they give them they take them, and that they don't
there are always bacon where there are stakes, give a fig to the doctor,
necessary to cure him of this disease: let's go back to our house and
Let's stop looking for adventures in lands and places that we don't know;
and, although it is considered, I am here the most loser, although it is yours
At the mercy of the worst offenders. I, who left with the government the wishes to be
more governor, I did not stop wanting to be count, which will never have an effect if
your grace ceases to be king, leaving the exercise of his cavalry; and so,
my hopes are going up in smoke.
-Shut up, Sancho, because you see that my seclusion and withdrawal will not exceed a
year; that later I will return to my honest exercises, and I must not miss
kingdom to win and a county to give you.
`` God hear it, '' said Sancho, `` and sin be deaf, I have always heard
to say that a good hope is better than a bad possession.
They were in this when Don Antonio entered, saying with samples of
very happy:
-Albricias, Senor Don Quixote, that Don Gregorio and the renegade who went by
he is on the beach! What do I say on the beach? He is already at the visorrey's house, and
will be here at the moment.
Don Quixote was somewhat delighted, and said:
-I'm really going to say that I was glad that everything had happened at the
the other way around, because he forced me to pass into Barbary, where with the strength of my
arm would give freedom not only to Don Gregorio, but to all Christians
captives are in Barbary. But what do I say, miserable? Am I not the
defeated? Am I not the one shot down? Am I not the one who cannot take a gun on
one year? Well, what do I promise? What do I praise myself for, if I should first use
the distaff that of the sword?
`` Leave yourself alone, sir, '' said Sancho, `` long live the hen, although with its nugget,
that today for you and tomorrow for me; and in these things of encounters and blows
There is no temptation, because the one who falls today can get up
tomorrow, if you don't want to be in bed; I mean let it go
to faint, without gaining new vigor for new quarrels. And get up
your mercy now to receive Don Gregorio, who seems to me to be
rowdy people, and he must be home by now.
And so was the truth; because, having already realized Don Gregorio and the
renegade to the viewer king of his return, don Gregorio eager to see Ana
Felix came with the renegade to Don Antonio's house; and, although Don Gregorio,
When they took him out of Algiers, it was with the habits of a woman, on the ship he exchanged them
by those of a captive who went out with him; but whoever came,
show himself to be a person to be coveted, served and esteemed, because he was
exceedingly beautiful, and the age, it seems, seventeen or eighteen
years. Ricote and his daughter came out to greet him: the father with tears and the
daughter honestly. They did not hug each other, because where there is much
love does not usually have too much ease. The two beauties together of don
Gregorio and Ana Félix admired in particular all together those who
they were present. The silence was there that spoke for the two lovers, and
the eyes were the tongues that discovered their happy and honest
thoughts.
The renegade recounted the industry and means he had to get Don Gregorio out;
Don Gregorio recounted the dangers and difficulties in which he had
women with whom he had met, not with long reasoning, but with brief
words, where he showed that his discretion was ahead of his years.
Finally, Ricote paid and liberally satisfied the renegade as well as the
who had rowed. Rejoined and reduced the renegade with the
Church, and, from a rotten member, he returned clean and healthy with penance and
repentance.
Two days later, the visorrey discussed with Don Antonio what way they would have to
that Ana Félix and her father stayed in Spain, appearing to them not to be from
any inconvenience that such a Christian daughter and father remained in her,
seem so well intentioned. Don Antonio offered to come to court at
negotiate it, where he was forced to come to other businesses, giving
understand that in it, through favor and gifts, many things
difficult are over.
`` No, '' said Ricote, who was present at this talk, `` you have to wait in
favors or gifts, because with the great Don Bernardino de Velasco, count
of Salazar, to whom His Majesty gave charge of our expulsion, are not worth
Pleas, not promises, not gifts, not pity; because, although it is true that
he mixes mercy with justice, as he sees that the whole body
of our nation is polluted and rotten, use with it before cautery
that burns that of the ointment that grinds; and thus, with prudence, with
sagacity, with diligence and with fears that he puts, he has carried on his
strong shoulders due to the weight of this large machine, without
our industries, ploys, solicitations, and frauds may have
dazzle his eyes of Argos, who is still alert, because he is not
none of ours remains or conceals, which, as a hidden root, which with
time comes later to sprout, and to bear poisonous fruits in Spain,
cleansed, freed from the fears in which our crowd
I had. Heroic resolution of the great Philip the Third, and unprecedented prudence in
to have commissioned it from such a Don Bernardino de Velasco!
-One by one, I will do, over there, the possible errands, and do the
Heaven, whatever is best served, ”said Don Antonio. Don Gregorio will leave
with me to console the sorrow that their parents must have for their absence; Ana
Felix will stay with my wife in my house, or in a monastery, and I know that
Mr. Visorrey will like to stay in his, good Ricote, until he sees
how I do business.
The visorrey consented to everything proposed, but Don Gregorio, knowing
What was happening, he said that in no way could he or wanted to leave Dona Ana
Felix; but, intending to see his parents, and to give a trace of
come back for her, came in the decreed concert. Ana Félix stayed with the
Don Antonio's wife, and Ricote at the visorrey's house.
The day of Don Antonio's departure arrived, and that of Don Quixote and Sancho,
that he went from there to two others; that the fall did not grant him that sooner he was
set out. There were tears, there were sighs, faints and sobs as
Don Gregorio say goodbye to Ana Félix. Ricote offered Don Gregorio a thousand
shields, if you wanted them; but he did not take any, but only five that
Don Antonio lent, promising their payment in court. With this, I know
The two left, and Don Quixote and Sancho later, as has been said: Don
Quixote disarmed and on his way, Sancho on foot, because the rucio was carrying
weapons.
Chapter LXVI. Which is about what the one who reads it will see, or the one who will hear it
I'll listen to him read
On leaving Barcelona, ​​Don Quixote returned to look at the place where there was
fallen, and said:
-Here was Troy! Here my misery, and not my cowardice, took my
glories achieved; here he used the fortune with me of his twists and turns;
here my exploits are darkened; here, finally, my luck fell to
never get up!
Hearing which Sancho said:
-So of brave hearts it is, my lord, to have suffering in the
misfortunes as joy in prosperity; and this I judge for myself,
that if when I was governor I was happy, now I am a squire of a
foot, I'm not sad; because I have heard that this is what they call out there
Fortuna is a drunken and cantankerous woman, and, above all, blind, and thus, no
see what he does, nor does he know who he knocks down, nor who he praises.
`` You are very philosopher, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` very discreetly.
you speak: I don't know who teaches you. What I can tell you is that there is no fortune
in the world, nor the things that happen in it, good or bad,
come perhaps, but by particular providence of heaven, and from here
comes what is usually said: that each one is the architect of his fortune. I
I have been mine, but not with the necessary prudence, and thus, I have
to the gallarín my presumptions; Well, I should think that the mighty greatness
of the horse of the White Moon could not resist the weakness of
Rocinante. Dare me in short, I did what I can, they knocked me down, and, although
I lost my honor, I did not lose, nor can I lose, the virtue of keeping my word.
When I was a knight-errant, daring and brave, with my works and with my
hands accredited my deeds; and now, when I am a pedestrian squire,
I will credit my words by fulfilling the one I gave of my promise. So walk
friend Sancho, and we are going to have in our land the year of the novitiate, with
whose confinement we will acquire new virtue to return to the never of me
forgotten exercise of arms.
`` Sir, '' answered Sancho, `` walking on foot is not such a pleasant thing, that I
move and encourage them to do great days. Let's leave these weapons hanging from
some tree, instead of a hanged man, and, occupying the back of the
rucio, feet lifted off the ground, we will do the days like yours
he asks for them and measures them; to think that I have to walk on foot and
to make them big is to think about the toilet.
`` You have said well, Sancho, '' replied Don Quixote, `` hang my arms for
trophy, and at the foot of them, or around them, we will engrave in the trees what
that in the trophy of arms of Roldán was written:
Nobody move them
that being can not with Roldán on trial.
"All that seems like pearls to me," answered Sancho; and, if it weren't for the
Rocinante had to do us for the road, it was also good
leave you hanging.
"Well, neither he nor the weapons," replied Don Quixote, "I want them to hang themselves,
because it is not said that good service, bad reward!
`` Your grace says very well, '' answered Sancho, `` because, according to the opinion of
discreet, the guilt of the donkey is not to be placed on the pack; and then we
event your grace is to blame, punish yourself, and do not burst
his wrath for the already broken and bloody weapons, nor for the meekness of
Rocinante, nor by the softness of my feet, wanting them to walk more than
just.
In these reasons and talks they spent all that day, and even another four,
without happening to them anything that hinders their way; and on the fifth day, at the entrance
of a place, they found at the door of an inn many people, who, being
party, he was there basking. When Don Quixote came to them, a
farmer raised his voice saying:
-Some of the two gentlemen who come here, who do not know the parts, will say
what has to be done in our bet.
`` Yes, I will say, by the way, '' answered Don Quixote, `` with all rectitude, if at all
I manage to understand it.
"" It is, then, the case, "said the farmer," good sir, that a neighbor we
place, so fat that it weighs eleven arrobas, he challenged another his neighbor to run,
weighing no more than five. It was the condition that a
100-step race with equal weights; and, having asked the
challenger how the weight was to be equalized, said that the challenged, that
weighs five arrobas, put six of iron on his shoulders, and thus
they would equal the eleven arrobas of the skinny one with the eleven of the fat one. "
"Not that," Sancho said at this point, before Don Quixote answered. Already
me, a few days ago I left being governor and judge, like everyone else
You know, it is time to find out these doubts and give an opinion in any lawsuit.
`` Answer in good time, '' said Don Quixote, `` Sancho, my friend, I'm not
to give crumbs to a cat, as I bring an uproar and deranged judgment.
With this license, Sancho told the farmers, who were many
around him the open mouth, waiting for the sentence of his:
-Brothers, what the fat man asks for does not have a path, nor does it have a shadow of
any justice; because if what is said is true, that the challenged can
choose weapons, it is not good for him to choose them such that they prevent him or
hinder coming out victorious; And so, it is my opinion that the fat challenger
scald, cut, thin, polish, and atilde, and get six arrobas from your
meats, from here or there of your body, as you see fit and
be; and in this way, remaining in five arrobas of weight, it will equalize and
it will adjust with the five of its opposite, and thus they will be able to run equally.
-I vote for such -said a farmer who listened to Sancho's sentence- that this
lord has spoken like a blessed and sentenced like a canon! But
good insurance that does not have to want to remove the fat one ounce of his meat,
the more six arrobas.
- The best thing is that they do not run - another answered -, because the skinny one does not grind
with the weight, not even the fat man is naked; and put half the bet on
came, and let us take these gentlemen to the tavern of the expensive, and on me the cape
when it rains.
`` I, gentlemen, '' answered Don Quixote, `` thank you, but I cannot
stop a point, because sad thoughts and events make me seem
rude and walking more than passing.
And so, giving Rocinante his spurs, he went forward, leaving them
admired to have seen and thus noticed his strange figure as the discretion
of his servant, who judged Sancho for such. And another of the farmers said:
"If the servant is so discreet, who must be the master!" I will bet that yes
they are going to study in Salamanca, which in a few moments will become mayors of
court; that everything is mockery, but study and more study, and have favor and
fortune; and when man least thinks, he finds himself with a rod in the
hand or with a miter on the head.
That night the master and the groom spent it in the middle of the field, on the
discovered; and another day, following his path, they saw that he was coming towards them
a man on foot, with some saddlebags around his neck and an azcona or chuzo in the
hand, own foot mail size; which, as it arrived next to don
Quixote, stepped forward, and half running came to him, and, embracing him by
the right thigh, which did not reach more, he said, with samples of much
joy:
-O my lord Don Quixote de la Mancha, and what great contentment must come to the
heart of my lord the duke when he learns that your worship returns to his
castle, which is still in it with my lady the duchess!
`` I don't know you, friend, '' answered Don Quixote, `` nor do I know who you are, if you don't
you tell me.
`` I, Mr. Don Quixote, '' replied the courier, `` am Tosilos, the lackey of the
Duke my lord, who did not want to quarrel with your grace over the marriage
of the daughter of Doña Rodríguez.
-God help me! said Don Quixote. Is it possible that you are the one
charming my enemies transformed into that lackey you say, for
let me down from the honor of that battle?
`` Street, good sir, '' replied the postman, `` there was no charm or
face change none: as lackey Tosilos I entered the lurch as
Tosilos lackey I came out of it. I thought of marrying without a fight, for having
the girl seemed fine, but my thought happened the other way around, well, like this
as your grace departed from our castle, the duke my lord told me
made a hundred sticks for having violated the ordinances that had me
given before entering the battle, and everything has stopped in that the girl is
now a nun, and Dona Rodríguez has returned to Castilla, and I am now going to
Barcelona, ​​to take a set of letters to the viceroy, which my master sent him. Yes
Your grace wants a drink, although hot, pure, here I have a
pumpkin full of the expensive, with I don't know how many slices of Tronchón cheese,
that will serve as an eye-catcher and a thirst awakening, in case you are sleeping.
"I want the stake," said Sancho, "and take the rest of the courtesy, and
scan good Tosilos, despite and despite how many charmers there are in
the Indies.
"Anyway," said Don Quixote, "you are, Sancho, the greatest glutton in the world and the
greatest ignorant on earth, because you are not persuaded that this email is
enchanted, and this Tosilos twisted. Stay with him and get fed, that I
I will go forward little by little, waiting for you to come.
The footman laughed, drew his gourd, unblocked his slits, and,
a muffin, he and Sancho sat on the green grass, and in good peace
company awakened and gave fund with all the spare saddlebags,
with such good breath, that they licked the sheets of letters, just because
smelled like cheese. Tosilos said to Sancho:
-Undoubtedly this your master, Sancho friend, must be a madman.
-As it should? Sancho answered. He owes nothing to anyone, he pays everything, and
more when the currency is madness. I see it well, and well I say it to him;
but what does it take advantage of? And more now that it is finished, because it is defeated
Knight of the White Moon.
Tosilos begged him to tell him what had happened to him, but Sancho
he replied that it was impolite to let his master wait for him; what another day,
if they met, there would be room for it. And, getting up, after
shaking off his coat and the crumbs from his beard,
and, saying '' to God '', he left Tosilos and reached his master, who in the shadow
from a tree was waiting for him.
Chapter LXVII. From Don Quixote's resolution to become a pastor and
follow the life of the country, while the year of his promise passed, with
other really tasty and good events
If many thoughts weary Don Quixote before he was knocked down,
many more fatigued him after he fell. In the shade of the tree I was,
as has been said, and there, like flies to honey, they came and sting
thoughts: some went to Dulcinea's disenchantment and others to the life that
he had to do in his forced retreat. Sancho arrived and praised the liberal
condition of the lackey Tosilos.
`` Is it possible, '' Don Quixote said to him, `` that you still, oh Sancho!
is he a true lackey? It seems that you have gone out of your mind to have
seen Dulcinea turned and transformed into a farmer, and the Knight of
the Mirrors at the Bachelor Carrasco, works all of the enchanters who
they haunt me. But tell me now: did you ask that Tosilos that you say what has
made God of Altisidora: if he has mourned my absence, or if he has already
the hands of oblivion the loving thoughts that in my presence the
fatigued?
`` They were not, '' answered Sancho, `` those that I had such that
ask nonsense. Body of me! Sir, is your grace now in
terms of inquiring about other people's thoughts, especially loving ones?
`` Look, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` there is a lot of difference from the works that are
they do out of love for those that are made out of gratitude. It may well be that a
gentleman is out of love, but it cannot be, strictly speaking, that
be ungrateful. It seems to me well, Altisidora; tell me all three
toilets you know, he cried on my departure, cursed me, vituperated me, complained,
Despite the shame, publicly: all signs that he adored me,
that the wrath of lovers usually stops in curses. I did not have
hopes to give him, no treasures to offer, because I have mine
given to Dulcinea, and the knights errant treasures are, like
those of the goblins, apparent and false, and I can only give you these agreements
that I have, without prejudice, but, of those that I have from Dulcinea, whom
you offend with the remission you have in whipping yourself and punishing those
meats, let me see wolf food, which they want to save before for the
worms than for the remedy of that poor lady.
`` Sir, '' Sancho answered, `` if you are going to tell the truth, I cannot
persuade that the spankings of my buttocks have to do with the
disenchantments of the enchanted ones, which is as if we said: "If your
head, anoint your knees. "At least, I will dare to swear that in how many
stories your grace has read that they treat of the errant cavalry has not
seen some disenchanted by whipping; but, yes or no, I'll give it to me,
When I feel like it and time gives me comfort to punish myself.
`` God do it, '' answered Don Quixote, `` and heaven give you grace to
you fall into the account and in the obligation that you run to help my lady,
that is yours, because you are mine.
In these talks they were following their path, when they arrived at the same place
and place where they were run over by bulls. Don Quixote recognized him;
he said to Sancho:
-This is the meadow where we meet the bizarre shepherds and gallant
pastors who wanted to renew and imitate the Arcadia pastoral in him,
thought as new as it is discreet, in the imitation of which, if you
It seems good, I would like, oh Sancho, that we become shepherds,
even the time I have to be collected. I will buy some sheep
and all the other things that are necessary to the pastoral exercise, and
calling me Pastor Quijotiz, and you Pastor Pancino, we will walk around
the mountains, the jungles and the meadows, singing here, mourning
there, drinking from the liquid crystals of the fountains, or from the
clean streams, or the mighty rivers. They will give us abundant
hand of its sweetest fruit the oaks, seat the trunks of the
very hard cork oaks, shade the willows, smell the roses, carpets of a thousand
nuanced colors the sprawling meadows, breath the clear and pure air, light
the moon and the stars, despite the darkness of the night, I taste the
singing, joy crying, Apollo verses, love concepts, with which we can
make us eternal and famous, not only in the present, but in the future
centuries.
`` Pardiez, '' said Sancho, `` who has squared me, and even angled me, such a kind of
life; and more, that the bachelor Samson must not have seen it well yet
Carrasco and Master Nicolás the barber, when they want to follow her, and
become shepherds with us; And even if God does not come willingly to
He also cares for entering the sheepfold, as he is cheerful and friend of
relax.
"You have said very well," said Don Quixote; and may be called the bachelor
Samson Carrasco, if he enters the pastoral guild, as he will undoubtedly enter, the
Pastor Sansonino, or Pastor Carrascón; the barber Nicolás will be able to
call Miculoso, as the old Boscán was called Nemoroso; I don't know about the priest
what name we give it, if it is not some derivative of its name, calling it
Pastor Curiambro. The shepherds of whom we must be lovers, as between
pears we can choose their names; and, well, my wife's block like this to
of shepherdess as that of princess, there is no reason to tire of looking for another
better come to him; you, Sancho, will put yours whatever you want.
`` I don't think, '' answered Sancho, `` to give it another one but Teresona's,
It will come in handy with your fatness and with your own, as it is called
Teresa; and more, that, celebrating it in my verses, I come to discover my
chaste wishes, because I do not go looking for trash bread in other people's houses.
The priest will not be good if he has a shepherdess, to set a good example; and if you want
the bachelor having her, his soul in his palm.
"Goodness to me," said Don Quixote, "and what a life we ​​have to give ourselves, Sancho
friend! What churumbelas must reach our ears, what bagpipes
zamoranas, what tambourines, and what rattles, and what rabeles! Well what
if these differences in music resounds that of the albogues! There it will be seen
almost all pastoral instruments.
"What are albogues," asked Sancho, "that I have not heard
seen in my whole life?
`` Albogues are, '' answered Don Quixote, `` plates like candlesticks of
azófar, which, giving one another through the void and hollow, makes a son, if not
very pleasant or harmonious, not unhappy, and goes well with rusticity
of the bagpipe and the tambourine; and this name albogues is Moorish, as they are
all those who in our Castilian language begin in al, it is convenient to
know: curry, lunch, alhombra, alguacil, lavender, warehouse, piggy bank,
and others like it, which must be few more; and only three have our
language that are Moorish and end in i, and are: borceguí, zaquizamí and
maravedí. Wallflower and alfaquí, both for the first and for the i in which
they finish, they are known by Arabic. This I have told you, by the way, by
having reduced to my memory the occasion of having named albogues; and
This exercise seems to help us a lot in perfection, being me
some poet, as you know, and being so also in the extreme
Bachelor Samson Carrasco. I don't say anything about the priest; But I'll bet you must
to have their tips and necklaces of a poet; and may he also have them master
Nicolás, I do not doubt it, because all, or most, are guitarists and
copleros. I will complain of absence; you will praise yourself as a firm lover; the
Pastor Carrascón, of despised; and the priest Curiambro, of what he can do more
serve yourself, and thus, the thing that there is more to be desired will walk.
To which Sancho replied:
`` I am, sir, so unhappy that I fear the day will not come when
such exercise see me. Oh what polished spoons I have to make when
pastor see me! What crumbs, what creams, what garlands and what
pastoral trifles, which, since they do not earn me a reputation for being discreet,
they will stop earning me that of ingenuity! Sanchica my daughter will take us
food to the herd. But, watch out, it looks good, and there are more shepherds
malicious than simple, and I would not want him to go for wool and return
shorn; and also love and not good wishes tend to be around
the fields as for the cities, and the pastoral huts as for the
royal palaces, and, once the cause is removed, sin is removed; and eyes that don't
See, heart that does not break; and it is better to jump to death than I beg of men
good ones.
`` No more proverbs, Sancho, '' said Don Quixote, `` because any of you have
Said is enough to convey your thought; and many times I have
advised not to be so lavish in sayings and to go hand in hand in
say them; but it seems to me that it is to preach in the desert, and "punish me my mother,
and I blow them up. "
-I seem to me -answered Sancho- that your mercy is like what they say: "He said
the frying pan to the boiler: Get off there black-eyed. "He's reprimanding me that
I do not say proverbs, and teach them your mercy two by two.
`` Look, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` I have the sayings on purpose,
and they come when I say them as a ring on the finger; but you bring them so for the
hair, that you drag, and do not guide; and if I remember correctly, another
I have once told you that sayings are short sentences, taken from the
experience and speculation of our ancient sages; and the saying no
It comes on purpose, before it is nonsense that sentence. But let's leave this behind
And, well, night is coming, let us withdraw from the royal road for some distance, where
We will spend tonight, and God knows what will be tomorrow.
They retired, had a late and bad dinner, well against Sancho's will,
who represented the straits of the errant cavalry used
in the forests and on the mountains, although perhaps the abundance was shown in
castles and houses, as well as those of Don Diego de Miranda as in the weddings of the
Rico Camacho, and Don Antonio Moreno; but I considered it not possible to be
always by day nor always at night, and thus, that one spent sleeping, and his master
watching.
Chapter LXVIII. Of the piggy adventure that befell Don Quixote
The night was somewhat dark, since the moon was in the sky, but not in
part that could be seen: that perhaps Mrs. Diana is going to go for a walk
the antipodes, and leaves the black mountains and dark valleys. Fulfilled gift
Quixote with nature sleeping the first dream, without giving rise to
second; well the opposite of Sancho, who never had a second, because it lasted
the dream from night to morning, in which his good
complexion and little care. Those of Don Quixote revealed him so that
woke up Sancho and said:
-I am amazed, Sancho, at the freedom of your condition: I imagine that
you are made of marble, or of hard bronze, in which there is no room for movement or
any feeling. I watch when you sleep, I cry when you sing, I
I faint from fasting when you are lazy and discouraged from sheer fed up.
Good servants is to bear the sorrows of their masters and feel their
feelings, for the sake of even seeming. Look at the serenity this night,
the loneliness in which we are, that invites us to interfere with some vigil
between our dream. Get up, for your life, and deviate some stretch of
here, and with good cheer and grateful boldness give yourself three or four hundred
whipping on good account of those of Dulcinea's disenchantment; and this begging you
I beg you, I don't want to come with you in your arms, like the other time,
because I know you have them heavy. After you have given yourself, we will pass the
what remains of the night singing, I my absence and you your firmness, giving from
Now is the beginning of the pastoral exercise that we must have in our village.
`` Sir, '' answered Sancho, `` I am not religious so that since the middle of
my dream got up and dicipline me, no less it seems to me than from the extreme of the
The pain of spanking can be passed to that of music. Your mercy let me
sleep and don't squeeze me in whipping me; that will make me take an oath of
never touch the hair of the gown, not that of my flesh.
-O hardened soul! O merciless squire! Oh misused bread and
Mercedes badly considered what I have done to you and I think about making you! For me
you have seen yourself governor, and for me you see yourself with proper hopes of being
count, or have another equivalent title, and will not delay the fulfillment of
them more than how long it takes to pass this year; that I post you have rough
lucem.
"I don't understand that," Sancho replied. I only understand that, while I sleep,
I have no fear, no hope, no work, no glory; and well there is the one
invented the dream, cloak that covers all human thoughts, delicacy that
removes hunger, water that drives away thirst, fire that warms the cold, cold
that tempers the ardor, and, finally, general currency with which all things
are bought, balance and weight that equates the shepherd with the king and the simple with
the discreet. Only one thing has bad sleep, as I have heard, and it is
that looks like death, because from a sleeping to a dead there is very little
difference.
"I have never heard you speak, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "as elegantly as
Now, where I come to know the saying that you sometimes
You tend to say: "Not with whom you are born, but with whom you have peace."
"Ah, such a pesia," replied Sancho, "Lord our master!" I'm not the one now
skewer proverbs, which also fall out of the mouths of two at your mercy
in two better than me, but there must be between mine and yours
this difference: that those of your mercy will come on time and mine to
untimely; but, in effect, they are all sayings.
In this they were, when they heard a dull roar and a harsh noise, which
through all those valleys it stretched. Don Quixote got up and put
hand to the sword, and Sancho crouched under the dart, putting himself at the
sides the bundle of weapons, and the pack of his donkey, so trembling with
fear as an uproarious Don Quixote. From point to point the
noise, and, getting close to the two fearful; at least, at one, than at
another, you know their bravery.
It is, then, the case that some men took to a fair to sell more than
six hundred pigs, with whom they walked at that hour, and it was so much
the noise they carried and the growling and hissing, which deafened the ears
of Don Quixote and Sancho, who did not realize what it could be. I'm coming from
the outstretched and growling herd flocked, and, without respect for authority
Don Quixote, or Sancho, passed over the top of the two, undoing
the trenches of Sancho, and knocking down not only Don Quixote, but carrying
in addition to Rocinante. The crowd, the growl, the swiftness with which
unclean animals arrived, put in confusion and on the ground to the
pack, to arms, to rocinante, to Sancho and to Don Quixote.
Sancho got up as best he could, and asked his master for the sword, saying
who wanted to kill half a dozen of those gentlemen and insane pigs,
I had already known that they were. Don Quixote told him:
-Let them be, friend, that this affront is the penalty of my sin, and just
punishment from heaven is that a defeated knight-errant is eaten by adivas, and
wasps sting him and pigs hollow him out.
`` It must also be punishment from heaven, '' answered Sancho, `` that the
squires of the defeated knights sting them flies, they eat lice and
hunger overwhelms them. If the squires were children of the knights to
whom we serve, or very close relatives of yours, it wasn't too much that we
reach the penalty of their guilt until the fourth generation; but what
Do the Panzas have to do with the Quixotes? Now, let's turn to
accommodate and sleep the little that remains of the night, and God will dawn and
we will thrive.
"You sleep, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "you were born to sleep; that
I, who was born to watch, in the time that remains from here to the day, I will give rein
to my thoughts, and I will vent them in a madrigalete, that, without you
You know, last night I composed in memory.
`` It seems to me, '' answered Sancho, `` that the thoughts that give rise to
make verses should not be many. Your grace, do whatever you want,
that I will sleep as long as I can.
And then, taking on the floor as much as he wanted, he curled up and slept like a dream
loose, without bonds, or debts, or any pain hindering it. Don
Quixote, leaning against a trunk of a beech or a cork oak -que Cide
Hamete Benengeli does not distinguish the tree that was-, to the sound of its same
sighs, he sang in this way:
-Love, when I think
in the evil that you give me, terrible and strong,
I'm running to death
thinking thus to end my immense evil;
more, in reaching the step
which is a port in this sea of ​​my torment,
I feel so much joy
that life struggles and it did not happen.
So living kills me
that death gives me life again.
Oh unheard condition,
the one that with me death and life!
Each verse of these accompanied with many sighs and not a few tears, well
like the one whose heart was pierced with the pain of expiration and with
Dulcinea's absence.
The day came at this, the sun gave Sancho with its rays in his eyes,
he awoke and waited, shaking and stretching his lazy limbs;
He looked at the destruction the pigs had made in his bakery, and cursed
the herd and even further on. Finally, they both returned to their beginning
on their way, and in the late afternoon they saw that up to ten
men on horseback and four or five on foot. Heart jumped
Don Quixote and Sancho was flustered, because the people who came to them
he had spears and shields and was very close to war. Don Quixote became
to Sancho, and said:
-If I could, Sancho, exercise my weapons, and my promise would not have
arms tied, this machine that comes upon us I had it for
cakes and painted bread, but it could be something else we fear.
At this, the horsemen arrived, and raising their spears, without speaking
word surrounded Don Quixote and put them behind his back and
breasts, threatening him with death. One of the people on foot, put a finger on the
As a sign to shut up, he grabbed Rocinante's bridle and pulled him out of the
path; and the others on foot, sheltering Sancho and the rucio, guarding
all wonderful silence, they followed in the footsteps of the one who led don
Quixote, who two or three times wanted to ask where they were taking him or what
they wanted; but, he was barely beginning to move his lips, when they were going to
close with the irons of the spears; the same thing happened to Sancho,
because, he barely showed any signs of speaking, when one of the people on foot, with a
stinger, it pricked him, and the rodent neither more nor less as if he wanted to speak.
The night closed, they quickened their pace, fear grew in the two prisoners, and
more when they heard than from time to time they said:
"Walk, troglodytes!"
-Hush, barbarians!
-Pay, cannibals!
-Do not complain, Scitas, nor open your eyes, Polyphemus killers, lions!
butchers!
And other names like these, with which they tormented the ears of the
miserable master and waiter. Sancho was saying among himself:
-We lovebirds? We barbers or scourers? Us
bitches, who do they say date, date? I'm not happy with these names: a
bad wind goes this flock; all evil comes together, like dogs
sticks, and may what threatens this adventure so
hapless!
Don Quixote was spellbound, unable to figure out how many speeches he made
what would be those names full of vituperies that were given them, of the
Which he took out in fair not expecting any good and fearing much evil. They arrived,
in this, an hour almost at night, to a castle, well known by Don
Quixote, which was the duke's, where there was little they had been.
-God for me! -he said, just as he knew the room- and what will this be? Yes
that in this house everything is courtesy and good restraint, but for the
defeated, good turns to bad and bad to worse.
They entered the main courtyard of the castle, and saw him dressed and put on
a way that their admiration increased and their fear doubled, as will be seen
in the next chapter.
Chapter LXIX. Of the rarest and newest event than in the whole speech
This great story came to Don Quixote
Those on horseback got out, and together with those on foot, taking in weight and
rapturously to Sancho and Don Quixote, they were brought into the courtyard,
around which almost a hundred axes burned, placed in their braziers, and,
through the corridors of the patio, more than five hundred lights; so that
Despite the night, which was somewhat dark, the
lack of the day. In the middle of the courtyard a mound rose like two staves of the
ground, covered all over with a huge canopy of black velvet, around
of which, on its steps, white wax candles burned on more than a hundred
silver candlesticks; Above which burial mound was shown a dead body of
such a beautiful maiden, who made the
same death. Her head was on a brocade pillow, topped with
a woven garland of various fragrant flowers, hands folded
on the chest, and, between them, a bouquet of yellow and winning palm.
On one side of the patio there was a theater, and on two chairs seated two
characters, who, by having crowns on their heads and brushes in their hands,
they showed signs of being some kings, already real or already feigned. Next to
from this theater, where you went up some steps, there were two other chairs,
on which those who carried the prisoners seated Don Quixote and
Sancho, all this keeping quiet and giving the two of them to understand with signs that
also keep quiet; but, without being pointed out, they kept silent, because the
admiration of what they were looking at had their tongues tied.
In this, they went up to the theater, with much accompaniment, two main
characters, who later became known to Don Quixote to be the Duke and the
Duchess, her guests, who sat on two very rich chairs,
next to the two who looked like kings. Who was not to be amazed at this,
adding to this having known Don Quixote that the dead body that
was on the mound was that of the beautiful Altisidora?
As the Duke and Duchess got into the theater, Don Quixote got up and
Sancho and they made them a deep humiliation, and the dukes did the
same, bowing their heads somewhat.
At this point, a minister came out, and, reaching Sancho, gave him a
black bocací clothes on top, all painted with flames of fire, and,
removing the hood, he put on his head a coroza, in the manner of which
they bring out the penitents by the Holy Office; and whispered in his ear no
unstitch his lips, because they would give him a gag, or remove the
life. Sancho looked at himself up and down, he saw himself burning in flames, but as
they did not burn him, he did not estimate them in two ardites. He took off his coroza, viola
painted with devils, he put it back on, saying to each other:
-Even well, that neither they burn me nor they carry me.
Don Quixote was also looking at him, and although fear had suspended his
senses, he did not stop laughing to see the figure of Sancho. He began, in this, to
to come out, apparently, under the burial mound a are submissive and pleasant of flutes,
that, for not being impeded by some human voice, because in that place the
In the same silence, he was silent to himself, he was soft and loving.
Then he made of himself improvised shows, next to the pillow of, apparently,
corpse, a handsome young man dressed in Roman style, who, to the sound of a harp,
that he himself played, he sang with a very soft and clear voice these two rooms:
-As Altisidora returns to itself,
killed by the cruelty of Don Quixote,
and while in the charming court
the peaked ladies will dress,
and while its owners my lady
dress with cloth and anascote,
I will sing her beauty and her misfortune,
with a better plectrum than the singer of Thrace.
And I still can't figure out what to do
this office only in life;
more, with the dead and cold tongue in the mouth,
I intend to move my voice due to you.
Free my soul from its narrow rock,
by the Stygian lake driven,
celebrating you will go, and that sound
it will stop the waters of oblivion.
`` No more, '' said one of the two who looked like kings, `` no more,
divine singer; that it would be to proceed in infinity to represent the
death and the graces of the peerless Altisidora, undead, like the world
ignorant think, but live in the tongues of Fame, and in the pain that
to return it to the lost light, Sancho Panza, who is present, has to pass;
And so, oh you, Radamanto, who with me judge in the gloomy caverns of
Lite !, because you know everything that in the inscrutable fates is
determined to bring this maiden to herself, say it and declare it later,
because we do not delay the good that we expect with his new return.
Scarcely had Minos, judge and companion of Radamanto, said this when,
Rising to his feet, Radamanthus said:
-Hey, ministers of this house, tall and short, great and small, come some
after others and seal Sancho's face with twenty-four mamonas, and twelve
pinches and six pinpricks on the arms and loins, which in this ceremony
Altisidora's health consists!
Hearing this, Sancho Panza broke the silence and said:
-I vote so, so I let myself seal my face or touch my face like
become Moorish! Body of me! What does groping my face have to do with
the resurrection of this maiden? The old woman returned to the pigs. They love
Dulcinea, and whip me to be disenchanted; die altisidora of evils
that God wanted to give him, and they have to resurrect make me twenty-four
mamonas, and pierce my body with pins and stroke my arms with
pinching. Those teasing, to a brother-in-law, that I am an old dog, and there is no
with me your, your!
-You will die! Radamanthus said aloud. Soften up, tiger; humble yourself,
Nembrot proud, and suffers and is silent, because they do not ask you for the impossible. And don't you
goals in finding out the difficulties of this business: you have to be,
you have to see yourself bruised, you have to moan pinched. Hey, I mean, ministers,
fulfill my command; if not, by the faith of a good man, that you have to
see what you were born for!
It seemed, in this, that up to six owners were coming through the courtyard in
procession, one after another, the four of them with cravings, and all raised the
right hands raised, with four wrist fingers outside, to make
longer hands, as now used. Sancho had not seen them, when,
roaring like a bull, he said:
-Well, I may let myself be groped by everyone, but allow myself to
play owners, not that! Punch my face, like you did to my master in this
same castle; pierce my body with the tips of buid daggers;
fasten my arms with tongs of fire, that I will bear it in patience,
or I will serve these gentlemen; But let them touch me owners, I will not allow it, yes
the devil took me.
Don Quixote also broke the silence, saying to Sancho:
-Be patient, son, and give pleasure to these gentlemen, and thank you very much to heaven
for having put such a virtue in your person, that with her martyrdom
Disenchants the enchanted and resurrect the dead.
The owners were already close to Sancho, when he, softer and more
persuaded, getting well in his chair, gave face and beard at first,
which was made by a very well sealed sucker, and then a great bow.
-Less courtesy; less mute, mistress, "said Sancho; what by God what
you bring your hands smelling of vinegar!
Finally, all the owners sealed him, and many other people from the house
they pinched; but what he could not suffer was the stinging of the
pins; and so he got up from his chair, apparently pouting, and, grasping
a burning ax that was next to him, struck after the owners, and after
all his executioners, saying:
-Outside, infernal ministers, who am not me of bronze, so as not to feel so
extraordinary martyrdoms!
In this, Altisidora, who must have been tired from having been so
supine time, turned on one side; seen which by the bystanders,
almost all with one voice said:
- Long live is Altisidora! Altisidora lives!
Radamanto commanded Sancho to put down his anger, since he had already reached
the intent that was sought.
Just as Don Quixote saw Altisidora stir, he went to kneel
in front of Sancho, saying:
-Agora is time, son of my entrails, not that my squire, that you give
some of the spankings that you are forced to give for the disenchantment of
Dulcinea. Now, I say, that is the time where you have virtue seasoned, and
effectively to do the good that is expected of you.
To which Sancho replied:
-This seems to me argado on argado, and not honey on flakes. It would be good
that after pinching, mamonas and pinching, the whipping would now come. No
have more to do but take a large stone, and tie it around my neck, and
find me in a well, which would not weigh much to me, if
to cure the ills of others I have to be the cow of the wedding. Leave me; but,
For God's sake, throw it out and throw it all down to thirteen, even if it's not sold.
Already in this, he had sat on the Altisidora mound, and at the same moment
the shawms sounded, accompanied by flutes and the voices of
all, who cheered:
- Long live Altisidora! Altisidora alive!
The dukes and kings Minos and Radamanto arose, and all together, with
Don Quixote and Sancho went to receive Altisidora and lower her from the mound;
who, playing the faint, bowed to dukes and kings,
and, looking across at Don Quixote, he said:
-God forgive you, unloving gentleman, because for your cruelty I have been
in the other world, in my opinion, more than a thousand years; and to you, oh the most
Compassionate squire that contains the orb! I thank you for the life I have.
Have more from today, friend Sancho, six shirts of mine that I am sending you to
make another six for yourself; and, if they are not all healthy, at least they are
all clean.
For this reason, Sancho kissed his hands, with his coroza in his hand and his knees
on the floor. The duke commanded that it be removed, and his hood returned,
and they put on his coat, and took off his clothes from the flames. Sancho begged
to the duke that they left him the clothes and miter, who wanted to take them to his land,
by sign and memory of that never seen event. The Duchess replied that
Yes they would leave, he already knew what a great friend of hers she was. Commanded the duke
clear the patio, and that everyone collect themselves in their rooms, and that don
Quixote and Sancho were taken to the ones they already knew.
Chapter LXX. That follows the sixty-nine, and deals with things not
toilets for the clarity of this story
Sancho slept that night in a stroller, in the same room as Don
Quixote, which he would like to excuse, if he could, because he well knew that
his master would not let him sleep with questions and answers, and he did not
was in a position to speak much, because the pains of martyrdom
past he had them present, and they did not let him free his tongue, and come to him
more worth sleeping in a hut alone, than not in that rich room
accompanied. His fear came out so true and his suspicion so true, that,
scarcely had his lord entered the bed, when he said:
"What do you think, Sancho, of the event that night?" Great and powerful is the
force of loveless disdain, as by your very eyes you have seen dead
Altisidora, not with other arrows, not with another sword, not with another
instrument of war, nor with deadly poisons, but with the consideration
of the rigor and disdain with which I have always treated her.
`` Let her die at a good hour as much as she wanted and as she wanted, '' he answered.
Sancho-, and leave me at my house, because neither I fell in love with her nor disdained her in
my life. I do not know nor can I think how Altisidora's health is,
maiden more capricious than discreet, have to see, as I have again
said, with the martyrdoms of Sancho Panza. Agora yes I come to know
clearly and distinctly that there are charmers and charms in the world, of whom
God save me, because I don't know how to get free; with all this, I beg your
Please let me sleep and don't ask me anymore, if you don't want me to throw myself
a window down.
`` Sleep, Sancho my friend, '' answered Don Quixote, `` if the
pinches and pinches received, and the mamonas done.
`` No pain, '' Sancho replied, `` came to the affront of the mamonas, not because of
other than for having made them my owner, that they may be confused; and around
beg your mercy to let me sleep, because sleep is relief from the
miseries of those who have them awake.
So be it, "said Don Quixote," and God be with you.
They both fell asleep, and at this time Cide wanted to write and give an account
Hamete, author of this great story, what prompted the dukes to raise
the building of the machine concerned. And he says that, having not forgotten
Bachelor Samson Carrasco when the Knight of Mirrors was defeated and
overthrown by Don Quixote, whose defeat and fall erased and undid all
his designs, he wanted to try his hand again, hoping for a better event than
last; and thus, finding out about the page who brought the letter and presenting Teresa
Panza, Sancho's wife, where Don Quixote was, looked for new weapons and
horse, and put the white moon on the shield, carrying it all on a
male, led by a farmer, and not Tomé Cecial, his former squire,
because he was not known to Sancho or Don Quixote.
So he arrived at the Duke's castle, who informed him of the path and defeat that
Don Quixote was wearing, with the intention of being in the jousts of Zaragoza.
He also told him the mockery that he had made him with the trace of disenchantment
of Dulcinea, which was to be at the expense of Sancho's buttocks. Anyway,
gave account of the mockery that Sancho had made his master, giving him to understand
that Dulcinea was enchanted and transformed into a peasant, and how the
Duchess his wife had given Sancho to understand that he was the one who
He was deceiving, because Dulcinea was truly enchanted; of that not little
laughed and admired the bachelor, considering the sharpness and simplicity of
Sancho, like the extreme of Don Quixote's madness.
The duke asked him that if he found him, and whether he defeated him or not, he should
there to give an account of the event. The bachelor did so; broke into his
search, he did not find him in Zaragoza, he went forward and what remains
referred.
He went back to the duke's castle and told him everything, with the conditions of
the battle, and that Don Quixote was already fulfilling again, as a good knight
andante, the word of retiring for a year in his village, in which time
it could be, said the bachelor, that he healed of his madness; that this was the
intention that had moved him to make those transformations, for being
It is a pity that a gentleman as well understood as Don Quixote was
mad. With this, he said goodbye to the duke, and returned to his place, waiting in
he to Don Quixote, who was coming after him.
Hence the duke took the opportunity to make that mockery of him: so much was
he liked the things of Sancho and Don Quixote; and making take the
paths near and far from the castle everywhere you imagined that
Don Quixote could return, with many of his servants on foot and
horse, so that by force or degree they would take him to the castle, if
find. They found him, gave notice to the duke, who, already forewarned of all
what he had to do, just as he had news of his arrival, he ordered to light
the axes and the lights of the courtyard and put Altisidora on the burial mound,
with all the devices that have been counted, so live, and so well done,
that from the truth there was very little difference to them.
And Cide Hamete says more: that scoffers are as crazy as
the mocked, and that the dukes were not two fingers of looking foolish, because
they put so much effort into making fun of two fools.
Which, the one sleeping soundly, and the other watching over
unleashed thoughts, it took them the day and the desire to get up; that the
idle feathers, neither defeated nor victorious, never pleased Don Quixote.
Altisidora -in Don Quixote's opinion, turned from death to life-,
following the mood of its lords, crowned with the same garland as in
the burial mound had, and dressed a white taffeta tunic, sown with
golden flowers, and the hair loosely down the back, leaning against a
black staff and very fine ebony, he entered Don Quixote's room with
whose presence, troubled and confused, shrugged and covered almost everything with the
Sheets and bedspreads on the bed, mute his tongue, without succeeding in making him
courtesy none. Altisidora sat on a chair by her head, and,
After giving a great sigh, with a tender and weakened voice he said:
-When leading women and demure maidens run over the
honor, and give license to the language that breaks for any inconvenience, giving
public news of the secrets that his heart holds, in close
term are found. I, Mr. Don Quixote de la Mancha, am one of these,
tight, defeated and in love; but, with all this, long-suffering and honest;
so much so that, being so, my soul burst due to my silence and I lost
life. Two days ago with the consideration of the rigor with which you have
treaty,
Oh harder than marble to my complaints,
inveterate gentleman! I have been dead, or at least judged by such a
those who have seen me; And if it weren't because Love, sympathizing with me,
deposited my remedy in the martyrdoms of this good squire, there I will stay
in the other world.
`` Love might as well, '' said Sancho, `` deposit them in those of my ass, that I
I would appreciate it. But tell me, lady, so heaven accommodates her with another
softer lover than my master: what did he see in the other world? What's up
in hell? Because whoever dies in despair, by force must have
that whereabouts.
`` To tell you the truth, '' answered Altisidora, `` I shouldn't have died from
everything, because I did not enter hell; that, if I went in there, one by one I wouldn't
I could get out of it, even if I wanted to. The truth is that I reached the door
where up to a dozen devils were playing ball, all in
Stockings and a doublet, with flanges garnished with the tips of Flemish randas,
and with a few turns of the same, which served as fists, with four fingers
arm from the outside, because they looked like the longest hands, in which
they had blades of fire; and what most admired me was that they served them, in
place of balls, books, apparently, full of wind and fluff, thing
wonderful and new; but this did not admire me as much as seeing that, being
natural for the players to rejoice the winners and to be saddened by the
who lose, there in that game everyone was grunting, everyone was scolding and everyone was
they cursed.
-That's not wonderful -answered Sancho-, because the devils, they play or not
play, you can never be happy, win or not.
"It must be so," replied Altisidora; but there is another thing that also me
he admires, I mean he admired me then, and it was that the first volley did not
There was no ball left standing, nor of use to serve again; and so,
They sold new and old books, which was wonderful. To one of them,
new, brand-new and well bound, they gave it a papirotazo that they took out
guts and scattered the leaves. Said one devil to another: 'Look what
That is the book. '' And the devil answered him: `` This is the second part of the
history of Don Quixote de la Mancha, not composed by Cide Hamete, his
first author, but by an Aragonese, who he claims to be a native of
Tordesillas ''. "Get him out of there," replied the other devil, "and put him in
the abysses of hell: let my eyes see him no more. '' '' Is it that bad? '',
answered the other. `` So bad, '' replied the first, `` that if I purposely
I would put myself to make him worse, I would not be right. '' They continued their game
rallying other books, and I, having heard Don Quixote name,
who both adamo and I love, I tried to keep this memory in my mind
vision.
`` Vision must have been, without a doubt, '' said Don Quixote, `` because there is no other self in
the world, and that story already goes around here from hand to hand, but it does not stop at
none, because everyone gives it up. I have not bothered to hear that I walk
as a fantastic body by the darkness of the abyss, nor by the clarity of
the earth, because I am not the one that this story is about. If she were
good, faithful and true, it will have centuries of life; but if it is bad, of its
I am delivered to the grave, the road will not be very long.
Altisidora was going to continue to complain about Don Quixote, when Don
Quixote:
-Many times I have told you, madam, that I regret that you have placed
your thoughts on me, because of mine before they can be grateful
that remedied; I was born to be from Dulcinea del Toboso, and the fairies, yes
There were, they dedicated me to her; and to think that some other beauty has
To occupy the place that it has in my soul is to think the impossible. Enough
disappointment is this so that you withdraw within the limits of your
honesty, because no one can force themselves to the impossible.
Hearing what Altisidora, showing to be angry and upset, said to him:
- Long live the Lord, Don Bacallao, soul of mortar, date stone, more stubborn
and hard that villain begged when he has his on the milestone, yes
I attack you, I have to put out your eyes! Do you think, don
beaten and beaten down, that I have died for you? Everything that
you have seen tonight has been feigned; that I am not a woman that for
Such camels had to let a black nail hurt me,
how much more to die.
"I think that very well," said Sancho, "that this thing about dying in love is
funny thing: they may well say it, but do, believe it Judas.
While in these talks, the musician, singer and poet who had
sung the two rooms already referred to, which, making a great
reverence to Don Quixote, said:
-Your grace, sir knight, tell me and have in the number of your
older servants, because I have been very fond of it for many days, so
for his fame as for his feats.
Don Quixote replied:
-Your grace tell me who you are, because my courtesy responds to your
merits.
The waiter replied that he was the musician and eulogist from the night before.
`` By the way, '' replied Don Quixote, `` your grace has a trembling voice,
but what he sang does not seem to me that it was very on purpose; because what do they have
What to see Garcilaso's stays with the death of this lady?
`` Do not be amazed at your mercy, '' replied the musician, ``
the stupid poets of our age it is used that each one writes as
I want to, and steal from whoever I want, whether or not it comes from their intent,
and there is no longer any stupidity that they sing or write that is not attributed to license
poetics.
Don Quixote would like to answer, but the Duke and Duchess hindered him,
who came to see him, between whom they had a long and sweet talk,
in which Sancho said so many grace and so much malice that they stopped
again admired the dukes, both with its simplicity and with its sharpness.
Don Quixote begged them to give him leave to leave that same day,
for the defeated knights, like him, were better off inhabiting a
zahúrda that not royal palaces. They gave it to her very willingly, and the Duchess
He asked her if it was up to her Altisidora grace. He replied:
-My Lady, your Lordship know that all the evil of this maiden is born of
idleness, the remedy for which is honest and continuous occupation. She has me
said here that randas are used in hell; and, well she owes them
know how to do, do not let them out of the hand, that, occupied in wagging the chopsticks,
the image or images of what is well
wants; and this is the truth, this is my opinion and this is my advice.
`` And mine, '' added Sancho, `` because I have never seen randera in all my life that
love has died; that the busiest maidens put their thoughts
in finishing his tasks than in thinking about his loves. So I say so for myself
while I'm digging, I don't remember hearing it; I mean, from my Teresa
Belly, whom I love more than my eyelashes.
"You say very well, Sancho," said the Duchess, "and I will make my Altisidora
from now on take care of doing some white work, you know how to do it
by extreme.
`` There is no reason, ma'am, '' replied Altisidora, `` to use your remedy, since the
Consideration of the cruelties that this scoundrel has used with me
I show that they will erase him from my memory without any other artifice. And with
license of your greatness, I want to get out of here, not to see ahead
of my eyes no longer his sad figure, but his ugly and abominable taste.
"So it seems to me," said the duke, "to what is usually said:
Because he who says insults,
close to forgiving.
Did Altisidora show to wipe her tears with a handkerchief, and,
bowing to his masters, he left the room.
`` I'm sending you, '' said Sancho, `` poor maiden, I'm sending you, I mean, bad luck,
for you have had them with a soul of esparto and with a heart of oak. TO
fee that if you had them with me, that another rooster would sing to you!
The talk was over, Don Quixote dressed, ate with the dukes, and left
That afternoon.
Chapter LXXI. Of what happened to Don Quixote with his squire Sancho
going to his village
The vanquished and upright Don Quixote was, on the one hand, also thoughtful,
and very happy for another. The expiration caused his sadness; and the joy, the
consider in the virtue of Sancho, as he had shown in the resurrection
Altisidora, although with some scruples he persuaded that the lover
maiden was really dead. There was nothing happy Sancho, because he
It was sad to see that Altisidora had not kept her word to give her the
shirts; and, going back and forth in this, he said to his master:
Truly, sir, I am the most unfortunate doctor to be found.
in the world, in which there are physicists who, by killing the sick they heal,
they want to be paid for their work, which is none other than to sign a card
some medicines, which are not made by him, but by the apothecary, and taste it
chanted; and to me, that the health of others costs me drops of blood, mamonas,
Pinching, pinching and spanking, they don't give me a shit. Well, I vote for them
such that if someone else is brought to my hands, someone who is sick, that, before I heal him,
they have to smear mine; that the abbot where he sings yanta, and I don't want
believe that heaven has given me the virtue that I have so that I
communicate with others from bóbilis, bóbilis.
"You are right, Sancho my friend," replied Don Quixote, "and I am very
Bad Altisidora in not having given you the promised shirts; and, since you
virtue is free data, which has not cost you any study, more than study
it is to receive martyrdoms in your person. I can tell you from me that if you wanted to pay
by the lashes of Dulcinea's disenchantment, I would have already given it to you as
good; but I don't know if the cure will come in handy, and I wouldn't want it to
prevent the award for medicine. With all that, I don't seem to know
will lose nothing in trying it: look, Sancho, the one you want, and whip yourself later, and
Pay yourself in cash and with your own hand, because you have my money.
To whose offerings Sancho opened his eyes and ears a span, and gave
consent in your heart to whip yourself willingly; and said to his master:
-Agora well, sir, I want to prepare to please your mercy in what
that you want, with my benefit; that the love of my children and my wife makes me
to show me interested. Tell me your mercy: how much will you give me for each
whip you give me?
`` If I were to pay you, Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` according to what
deserves the greatness and quality of this remedy, the treasure of Venice, the mines
from Potosí they were little to pay you; you take the temptation to what you take mine,
and put the price on each spanking.
"They," answered Sancho, "are three thousand and three hundred and so many; of them I
I have given up to five: the rest remain; enter among the many these five,
and let's come to the three thousand and three hundred, that each one, that does not
I'll take less if everyone sent me, they ride three thousand and three hundred
cuartillos, which are the three thousand, one thousand and five hundred real
seven hundred and fifty reais; and the three hundred make one hundred and fifty
real means, which come to make seventy-five reals, which, joining
The seven hundred and fifty, is for all eight hundred and twenty-five
real. These I will embezzle from those that I have of your mercy, and I will enter
in my house rich and happy, although well beaten; because they are not taken
trout ... and I won't say more.
-Oh blessed Sancho! O kind Sancho, "replied Don Quixote," and how
Dulcinea and I have to be forced to serve you every day that he
Heaven give us life! If she returns to being lost, that is not possible
but return, your misery will have been said, and my expiration, very happy
triumph. And look, Sancho, when do you want to start discipline, why?
I abbreviate it, I add a hundred reais.
-When? Sancho replied. Tonight, without fail. Seek your mercy
that we have it in the field, to the open sky, that I will open my flesh.
Night came, awaited by Don Quixote with the greatest anxiety in the world,
appearing to him that the wheels of Apollo's chariot had broken, and that the
The day lasted longer than usual, just as it happens to the
lovers, who never adjust the count of their desires. Finally I know
they entered among some pleasant trees that were little deviated from the road,
where, leaving the saddle and pack of Rocinante and the rucio empty,
they stretched out on the green grass and dined on Sancho's spare; which,
making the halter and the jáquima del rucio a powerful and flexible
whip, he withdrew up to twenty paces from his master, among some beech trees. Don
Quixote, who saw him go boldly and energetically, said to him:
-Look, friend, that you do not break; gives rise to whips await
others; do not want to rush so much in the race, that in the middle of it you
short of breath; I mean do not give yourself so strong that you miss your life
before reaching the desired number. And, because you do not lose by letter of more or
of less, I will be from apart counting for this my rosary the lashes
that you give yourself. Favor yourself heaven as your good intention deserves.
-The good payer does not hurt garments -answered Sancho-: I plan to give myself
so that, without killing myself, it hurts; that this is what the
substance of this miracle.
Then he undressed half his length up, and, snatching the string, began to
be given, and Don Quixote began to count the lashes.
Up to six or eight Sancho would have given himself, when it seemed to him to be heavy the
mockery and very cheap the price of it, and, stopping a little, said to his master
that it was deceived, because each spanking of those deserved to be paid to
medium real, not that a cuartillo.
`` Go on, Sancho friend, and don't be dismayed, '' Don Quixote said to him,
the price stop.
"That way," said Sancho, "to the hand of God, and let it rain lashes!"
But the sly man stopped giving them to them on the back, and hit the trees,
with a few sighs from time to time, it seemed that with each of them
his soul was ripped out. Tender is that of Don Quixote, afraid that he will not be
life ended, and he did not get his wish because of Sancho's recklessness, he
said:
-For your life, friend, let this business stay at this point, I think
This medicine is very harsh, and it will be good to give time to time; that was not won
Zamora in an hour. More than a thousand lashes, if I have not counted wrong, you have given yourself:
they are enough for now; that the ass, speaking rudely, suffers the burden, but
don't overload it.
"No, no, sir," answered Sancho, "it should not be said for me:"
paid, broken arms. "Turn away your mercy a little more and let me give
another thousand lashes even, that two levadas from these we will have fulfilled
this game, and we will still have clothes left over.
"Well, you find yourself with such a good disposition," said Don Quixote, "heaven
help you, and stick, that I move away.
Sancho returned to his task with such boldness that he had already removed the
barks to many trees: such was the severity with which it was whipped; and,
Raising his voice once, and giving a wild lash on a beech tree, he said:
-Here you will die, Samson, and how many with him are!
Don Quixote then came to the sound of the wounded voice and the blow of the
rigorous whipping, and, grasping the twisted halter that served as a
Sancho, said:
-Don't let luck, Sancho friend, that for my pleasure you lose the
life, which must serve to support your wife and children: wait
Dulcinea better situation, that I will contain myself in the limits of the
hope propinc, and I will wait for you to gain new strength, so that
conclude this business to everyone's liking.
`` Well, your grace, my lord, wants it that way, '' answered Sancho, `` be it in
good time, and throw your iron on these backs, I'm sweating
and I wouldn't want to catch a cold; that the new disciplinarians run this danger.
Don Quixote did so, and, staying on the ball, sheltered Sancho, who
slept until the sun woke him, and then they went back to
road, to which they ended, at that time, in a place three leagues from
I was there. They alighted at an inn, which Don Quixote recognized as such, and
not by castle of cava honda, towers, rakes and drawbridge; that,
after they defeated him, with more judgment in all things he passed, as
agora will be said. They lodged him in a low room, whom they served as guadameciles
some old painted twill, as they are used in the villages. In one of them
Elena's robbery was painted with a very bad hand, when the daring
The guest took it to Menalao, and in another was the story of Dido and
Aeneas, she on a high tower, as if she was gesturing with a half sheet
to the fugitive guest, who by sea, on a frigate or brig, was leaving
running away.
He noticed in both stories that Elena was not very reluctant, because she laughed
to socapa and to the sly; but the beautiful Dido showed to shed tears of the
walnut size by the eyes. Seeing which Don Quixote said:
-These two ladies were very unfortunate, for not having been born in this
age, and I am especially unhappy not to have been born in his: he will find
to these gentlemen, nor was Troy burned, nor Carthage destroyed, for with
only that I killed Paris so many misfortunes would be excused.
"I'll bet," said Sancho, "that before long there won't be
still life, sale or inn, or barber shop, where the
history of our exploits. But I would like to be painted by someone else's hands
a better painter than the one who has painted these.
"You are right, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "because this painter is like
Orbaneja, a painter who was in Úbeda; that, when they asked him what
he painted, he answered: "Whatever comes out"; and if by chance he painted a rooster,
She wrote underneath: "This is a rooster", because they didn't think she was a fox. Highlights
So it seems to me, Sancho, that he must be the painter or writer, that
all is one, which brought to light the story of this new Don Quixote who has
salido: who painted or wrote what came out; or will it have been like a poet who
spent years at court, called Mauleon, who answered in
suddenly to how much they asked him; and, asking one what he wanted to say
Deum de Deo, replied: `` Wherever I may. '' But, putting this aside, tell me
if you think, Sancho, give you another batch tonight, and if you want it to be
under roof, or to the open sky.
`` Pardie, sir, '' answered Sancho, `` for what I am going to give myself, that is
it gives me at home than in the country; but, with all that, I would like it to be between
trees, which seem to accompany me and help me carry my work
wonderfully.
`` Well, it shouldn't be like that, my friend Sancho, '' answered Don Quixote, `` but to
that you take strength, we have to save it for our village, which, at most
late, we'll get there after tomorrow.
Sancho replied that he did his pleasure, but that he wanted to conclude with
brief that hot-blooded business and when the mill was down,
because in the delay there is often danger; already God begging
and with the mallet giving, and that a "take" was worth more than two "I will give you", and the
bird in hand that the vulture flying.`` 
No more proverbs, Sancho, for one God alone, '' said Don Quixote, `` which seems
that you go back to the sicut erat; speak to the plain, to the smooth, to the no
intricate, as I have told you many times, and you will see how much bread is worth for
hundred.
`` I don't know what bad luck this mine is, '' answered Sancho, `` I can't say
reason without saying, or saying that doesn't seem like reason to me; but I will make amends,
if you can.
And, with this, their talk ceased for that time.
Chapter LXXII. How Don Quixote and Sancho Came to Their Village
All that day, waiting for the night, they were in that place and inn don
Quixote and Sancho: the one, to finish in the clean campaign the batch of their
discipline, and the other, to see the end of it, which consisted of his
wish. At this point a walker on horseback arrived at the inn, with three or four
servants, one of whom said to what the lord looked like:
-Here may your grace, Mr. Álvaro Tarfe, spend your siesta today: the
Inn looks clean and fresh.
Hearing this, Don Quixote said to Sancho:
-Look, Sancho: when I leafed through that book of the second part of my
history, it seems to me that in passing I came across this name of Don Álvaro
Tarfe.
"It may well be," answered Sancho. Let him get off, then he will
we will ask.
The knight got out, and, in front of Don Quixote's room, the hostess
gave him a low room, harnessed with other painted twill, like the ones
he had Don Quixote's estancia. The newly arrived gentleman went to
summer, and, going out to the portal of the inn, which was spacious and cool,
which Don Quixote was walking, asked him:
"Where good is your grace walking, gentleman gentleman?"
And Don Quixote replied:
-To a village that is close here, where I am from. And your grace,
Where do you walk
"I, sir," replied the knight, "am going to Granada, which is my homeland."
"And good country!" replied Don Quixote. But, please tell me, for
courtesy, your name, because it seems to me that I should care to know more than
what I can say.
"My name is Don Álvaro Tarfe," replied the guest.
To which Don Quixote replied:
-Without any doubt I think that your grace must be that Don Álvaro
Tarfe that is printed in the second part of the history of Don Quixote de
La Mancha, just printed and brought to light by a modern author.
`` I am the same, '' replied the knight, `` and this Don Quixote, subject
main of that story, he was a great friend of mine, and I was the one who
removed from his land, or, at least, I encouraged him to come to a fair that
They were made in Zaragoza, where I went; and, in truth in truth I did
many friends, and that I took him from not patting him on the back
executioner, for being too daring.
"And tell me, your grace, Mr. Don Álvaro, do I look like that guy in any way?"
Don Quixote, what does your grace say?
"No, by the way," replied the host, "not at all."
"And this Don Quixote," said ours, "did he bring with him a squire named
Sancho Panza?
"Yes, he had," answered Don Álvaro; and, although he had a reputation for being very funny,
I never heard him say funny that he had it.
"I think so very well," Sancho said at this time, "because saying thank you
It is not for everyone, and that Sancho that your grace says, gentleman gentleman,
must be some great scoundrel, frion and thief together, that the
I am true Sancho Panza, who have more graces than rains; if not,
Make the experience your mercy, and follow me for at least one
year, and you will see that they fall at every step, and such and so many that, without my knowing
most times what I say to myself, I make those who listen to me laugh; and the
true Don Quixote de la Mancha, the famous, the brave and the discreet,
the lover, the debunker of grievances, the guardian of pupils and orphans,
the protection of widows, the slayer of maidens, the one who has for
the only lady like Dulcinea del Toboso, it is this man who is
present, who is my master; all any other Don Quixote and any other
Sancho Panza is mockery and a dream thing.
"By God I believe it!" replied Don Álvaro, `` because more thanks you have
You said, friend, in four reasons that you have spoken, that the other Sancho
Belly in how many I heard him speak, which were many. I had more of a glutton
that of well spoken, and more of fool than of funny, and I have by without a doubt
that the enchanters who persecute the good Don Quixote have wanted
persecute me with Don Quixote the bad guy. But I don't know what to say; what will i dare
I swear that I left him in the house of the Nuncio, in Toledo, so that he
cured, and now another Don Quixote remains here, although quite different from the
Own.
`` I, '' said Don Quixote, `` don't know if I'm good, but I can say that I'm not the
bad; for proof of which I want your mercy to know, my lord gift
Álvaro Tarfe, who in all the days of my life I have not been in Zaragoza;
earlier, for having told me that this fantastic Don Quixote had been found in
the just des city, I did not want to enter it, to remove the beards
of the world his lie; and thus, I went clearly to Barcelona, ​​archive of the
courtesy, hostel for foreigners, hospital for the poor, homeland of
the brave, revenge for the offended, and gracious correspondence from the firm
friendships, and, in place and in beauty, unique. And, although the events that
she have happened to me are not very happy, but very sad, the
I've been without it, just for having seen it. Finally, Mr. Álvaro Tarfe,
I am Don Quixote de la Mancha, the same one who says fame, and not that
unfortunate who has wanted to usurp my name and honor himself with my
thoughts. At your mercy I beg, for what must be a knight,
be served to make a statement before the mayor of this place, that
your grace has not seen me in all the days of his life until now, and
that I am not the Don Quixote printed in the second part, nor this Sancho
Belly my squire is the one that your grace knew.
`` I will do that very willingly, '' answered Don Álvaro, `` since it causes
admiration to see two Don Quixotes and two Sanchos at the same time, so
agreeable in names as different in actions; and I say again
and I affirm that I have not seen what I have seen, nor what has happened to me
last.
`` Undoubtedly, '' said Sancho, `` your grace must be delighted, as
my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, and pray to heaven that her
disenchantment of your grace to give me another three thousand and as many lashes as
I give myself for her, that I gave them to me without any interest.
"I don't understand whipping," said Don Álvaro.
And Sancho replied that it was long to tell, but that he would tell him
if they were going the same way.
At this time it was time to eat; Don Quixote and Don Álvaro ate together.
Perhaps the mayor of the town entered the inn, with a clerk, before the
which mayor asked Don Quixote, by a request, that to his right
It was fitting that Don Álvaro Tarfe, that gentleman who was present there,
declare before his mercy that he did not know Don Quixote de la Mancha, that
It was also there present, and that it was not the one that was printed on a
history entitled: Second part of Don Quixote de la Mancha, composed
by a certain from Avellaneda, a native of Tordesillas. Finally, the mayor
provided legally; the declaration was made with all the might that in
such cases had to be done, which left Don Quixote and Sancho very
happy, as if they cared a lot about such a statement and did not show
clear the difference between the two Don Quixotes and that of the two Sanchos,
works and their words. Many courtesies and offerings passed between don
Álvaro and Don Quixote, in which the great manchego showed his discretion,
so that he disappointed Don Álvaro Tarfe of the error in which he was; which
It was implied that he must be delighted, for he was playing with his hand two
so contrary Don Quixotes.
Evening came, they left that place, and after half a league they
They separated two different roads, the one that led to the village of Don
Quixote, and the other one that Don Álvaro had to wear. In this little space
Don Quixote told him the misfortune of his expiration and the charm and the
Dulcinea's remedy, which all put Don Álvaro, the
which, embracing Don Quixote and Sancho, went on his way, and Don Quixote
his, which that night passed among other trees, to give rise to
Sancho to fulfill his penance, which he fulfilled in the same way as the
last night, at the expense of the bark of the beech trees, fed up more than
backs, that he guarded them so much that they could not remove the
fly, even if it was on him.
The deceived Don Quixote did not miss a single stroke of the account, and found that
with those of last night it was three thousand and twenty-nine. It seems there was
early morning the sun to see the sacrifice, with whose light they continued their
the way, discussing between the two of Don Álvaro's deception and how well
agreed had been to take his statement in court, and so
authentically.
That day and that night they walked without happening to them anything worth telling,
if it was not that Sancho finished his task there, that Don Quixote
overly happy, and I was waiting for the day, to see if I would run into
disenchanted Dulcinea his mistress; and, following his path, he did not meet a woman
none that I was not going to recognize if it was Dulcinea del Toboso, having for
infallible not being able to lie to Merlin's promises.
With these thoughts and wishes they climbed an uphill, from which
discovered their village, which, seen by Sancho, knelt on his knees and
said:
-Open your eyes, desired homeland, and see that Sancho Panza, your
son, if not very rich, very well spanked. Open your arms and also receive your
son Don Quixote, if he comes defeated by the arms of others, he comes victorious
of himself; which, he has told me, is the largest maturity that
can be desired. I carry money, because if they gave me good spankings, fine
gentleman I was leaving.
`` Leave your nonsense, '' said Don Quixote, `` and we are going with the right foot to enter
in our place, where we will give way to our imaginations, and trace
that in pastoral life we ​​intend to exercise.
With this, they came down the slope and went to their village.
Chapter LXXIII. Of the omens that Don Quixote had upon entering his village,
with other events that adorn and credit this great story
At the entrance of which, according to Cide Hamete, Don Quixote saw that in the
You were from the place, two mochachos were fighting, and one said to the other:
-Don't get tired Periquillo, you don't have to see her every day of your
life.
Don Quixote heard him, and said to Sancho:
-Don't you see, friend, what that young man said: '' You don't have to see her
in all the days of your life ''?
"Well, what difference does it make," answered Sancho, "that the mochacho said that?"
-That? replied Don Quixote. Don't you see that, applying that word to
My intention, do you mean that I don't have to see Dulcinea anymore?
Sancho wanted to answer him, when he was hindered to see that because of that campaign
a hare was fleeing, followed by many greyhounds and hunters, which,
Fearful, she came to gather and crouch under the feet of the roe deer.
Sancho took it by hand and presented it to Don Quixote, who was
saying:
-Malum signum! Malum signum! Hare flees, greyhounds follow her: Dulcinea no
It seems!
"Strange is your mercy," said Sancho. Suppose this hare is
Dulcinea del Toboso and these greyhounds that chase her are the miscreants
charmers who transformed her into a peasant: she flees, I catch her and
I place in the power of your mercy, who holds her in his arms and gives her:
What bad sign is this, or what bad omen can we take from here?
The two young men from the quarrel came to see the hare, and at one
Dellos asked Sancho why they were fighting. And it was answered by the one who
had said '' you will not see her again in your whole life '', that he had taken the
another boy a cricket cage, which he did not intend to turn it into at all
his life. Sancho took four quarters out of his pouch and gave them to the
mochacho by the cage, and put it in Don Quixote's hands, saying:
`` Here, sir, these omens are broken and shattered, which do not have to
see more with our events, as I imagine, though silly, than with
the clouds of yesteryear. And if I remember correctly, I have heard the priest say
our town that is not of Christian or discreet people to look at these
childishness; and even your mercy himself told me the past few days, giving me
understand that all those Christians who looked on omens were fools.
And it is not necessary to emphasize this, but let's go ahead and enter
in our village.
The hunters arrived, asked for their hare, and Don Quixote gave it to them; they passed
ahead, and, at the entrance of the town, they ran into a meadow praying to the
priest and high school graduate Carrasco. And it is to know that Sancho Panza had cast
on the black and on the mess of weapons, to serve as a pastry chef,
Bocací's tunic, painted with flames of fire that clothed him in the
Duke's castle the night Altisidora came to. Accommodate him too
the coroza on the head, which was the newest transformation and adornment with
that a donkey was never seen in the world.
Then the two of the priest and the bachelor were known, who came to
them with open arms. Don Quixote got out and embraced them
tightly; and the mochachos, who are lynxes without toilets, spotted the
coroza of the donkey and they came to see him, and said one to another:
-Come, mochachos, and you will see Sancho Panza's ass more gallant than Mingo, and
Don Quixote's beast thinner today than on the first day.
Finally, surrounded by mochachos and accompanied by the priest and the bachelor,
They entered the town, and went to Don Quixote's house, and found the
the door to the mistress and her niece, to whom the news of
his coming. Neither more nor less had they been given to Teresa Panza, a woman from
Sancho, who, disheveled and half naked, holding the hand of
Sanchica, her daughter, went to see her husband; and, seeing him not so well
slimmed down as she thought a governor should be, she said:
-How do you come like this, my husband, it seems to me that you come on foot and
Do you bear the resemblance of a misgoverned man rather than a governor?
`` Shut up, Teresa, '' answered Sancho, `` many times where there are stakes there are no
there are bacon, and let's go to our house, you will hear wonders there. Money
I bring, which is what matters, won by my industry and without damage from
nobody.
"Bring your money, my good husband," said Teresa, "and be won here or
over there, that, however you have won them, you will not have used
new in the world.
Sanchica embraced his father, and asked him if he had something, that he was
waiting like the water of May; and, grasping the side of the belt, and his
woman holding hands, throwing her daughter to the black, they went home, leaving
Don Quixote in his own, in the power of his niece and his mistress, and in the company
the priest and the bachelor.
Don Quixote, without keeping terms or hours, at that very point withdrew
alone with the bachelor and the priest, and briefly told them his
expiration, and the obligation in which he had remained not to leave his village
in a year, which he intended to keep to the letter, without transferring it to
an atom, well as a knight errant, bound by punctuality and
order of the errant cavalry, and that he had planned to become that year
shepherd, and entertain themselves in the solitude of the fields, where
He could give way to his loving thoughts, exercising in the pastoral and
virtuous exercise; and that I begged them, if they did not have much to do and not
they were handicapped in more important business, they wanted to be their
companions; that he would buy enough sheep and cattle to give them
name of pastors; and that made them know that the most important thing about that
business was done, because I had their names on them, that
They would come as a mold. The priest told him to tell them. Answered don
Quixote that he was to be called Pastor Quijotiz; and the bachelor, the
pastor Carrascón; and the priest, pastor Curambro; and Sancho Panza, the pastor
Pancino.
They were all amazed to see Don Quixote's new madness; but why I don't know
He would go out of town to his cavalry again, hoping that in that year
could be healed, they conceded with their new intention, and approved by
discreet his madness, offering himself to him as companions in his exercise.
"And more," said Sansón Carrasco, "that, as everyone knows, I am
famous poet and at every step I will compose pastoral verses, or courtiers,
or whatever else comes to mind, so that we entertain ourselves by those
andurriales where we have to walk; and what is most necessary, my lords,
is that each one chooses the name of the pastor who plans to celebrate in their
verses, and that we do not leave a tree, no matter how hard it may be, where it does not
engrave your name, as is the custom and use of loving shepherds.
`` That's right, '' answered Don Quixote, `` since I am free from
look for the name of a fictitious shepherdess, because there is the unparalleled Dulcinea
Toboso, glory of these shores, adornment of these meadows, sustenance of the
beauty, cream of grace, and, finally, subject on whom can
settling all praise well, however hyperbole it may be.
-That's true -said the priest-, but we will look around there for female shepherds
mañeruelas, that if they do not square us, they corner us.
To which Samson Carrasco added:
-And when they are missing, we will give them the names of the stamped and printed ones,
with whom the world is full: Fílidas, Amaryllis, Dianas, Fléridas,
Galateas and Belisardas; that, well they sell them in the squares, well we can
buy us and have them for ours. If my lady, or, to put it better,
My shepherdess, maybe her name will be Ana, I will celebrate her under the name of
Anarda; and if Francisca, I will call her Francenia; And if Lucia, Lucinda, what
everything comes out there; and Sancho Panza, if he is to enter this cofadría,
He will be able to celebrate his wife Teresa Panza with the name Teresaina.
Don Quixote laughed at the application of the name, and the priest praised him infinitely.
his honest and upright resolve, and offered again to keep him company
all the time that he vacated from attending to his forced obligations. With
this, they said goodbye to him, and begged and advised him to have his
health, with giving yourself what was good.
As luck would have it, his niece and mistress heard the three of them talk; and,
just as they left, they entered both with Don Quixote, and the niece
said:
-What is this, sir uncle? Now what did we think that your grace
He was reduced again in his house, and to spend in it a quiet and honorable life,
wants to get into new mazes, making
Little shepherd, you who come,
pastorcico, what are you going?
Well, in truth the alcacel for zampoñas is already hard.
To which the mistress added:
And will your grace be able to spend summer naps in the country,
serene winter, the howl of wolves? No, by the way, this is
exercise and trade of robust men, hardened and bred for such
ministry almost from the girdles and mantillas. Still, bad for bad, it is better to be
errant knight than shepherd. Look, sir, take my advice, don't be
I give about being fed up with bread and wine, but fasting, and over fifty years
I'm of age: stay at home, tend to your farm, confess to
often, favor the poor, and on my soul if it be bad for it.
`` Be quiet, daughters, '' Don Quixote replied, `` I know well what
complies. Take me to bed, it seems to me that I am not very good, and have
by the way, now be a knight errant or shepherd to walk, I will not
always to go to what you need, as you will see from the work.
And the good daughters - who were undoubtedly mistresses and nieces - took him to the
bed, where they fed him and gave him as much as possible.
Chapter LXXIV. How Don Quixote fell ill, and the testament he made, and
his death
As human things are not eternal, always going in decline of their
beginning to the end, especially the lives of the
men, and like Don Quixote's had no heavenly privilege to
stop the course of his, came to an end and end when he least
thought; because, or it was the melancholy that caused him to see himself
defeated, or by the disposition of heaven, which so ordered, he was
a fever took hold that kept him in bed for six days, in which he was
visited many times by the priest, the bachelor and the barber, his friends,
without removing Sancho Panza, his good squire, from his head.
These, believing that the regret of being defeated and of not seeing their
Desire in the freedom and disenchantment of Dulcinea had him of that luck,
by all possible means they tried to cheer him up, telling him the bachelor
to cheer up and get up, to begin his pastoral exercise, for the
which had already composed an eclogue, what a bad year for how many Sanazaro had
composed, and that he already had bought with his own money two famous dogs
to keep the cattle: the one named Barcino, and the other Butrón, who
They had been sold by a rancher from Quintanar. But not for this he left don
Quixote his sadness.
His friends called the doctor, he took his pulse, and he was not very happy, and
He said that, whether or not he should attend to the health of his soul, because that of the
body was in danger. Don Quixote heard only in a calm mood, but not
Thus heard his mistress, his niece and his squire, who began to cry
tenderly, as if they already had him dead before him. It was the opinion of
doctor that melancholy and disappointments ended him. Don Quixote begged that
they left him alone, because he wanted to get some sleep. They did it like that and slept off
a jerk, as they say, more than six hours; so much so that the mistress and the
niece who was to stay in the dream. Woke up after time
said, and, giving a great voice, said:
"Blessed be the mighty God, who has done me so much good!" Anyway, their
Mercies have no limit, neither abbreviate nor prevent the sins of
the men.
The niece was attentive to the uncle's reasons, and they seemed more
agreed that he used to say them, at least, in that disease, and
asked him:
"What is your grace saying, sir?" Do we have something new? That
are these mercies, or what sins of men?
`` Mercies, '' answered Don Quixote, `` niece, are those that in this
God has used me for a moment, whom, as I said, is not prevented by my
sins. I have my judgment now, free and clear, without the hazy shadows of
ignorance, which was put on me by my bitter and continuous legend of the
detestable books of chivalry. I already know their nonsense and their
charms, and I am not sorry but that this disappointment has come so late, that
does not leave me time to make any reward, reading others that are light
of the soul. I feel, niece, on the verge of death; I would like to do it in such a way
way, to imply that my life had not been so bad that I
renown of madman, which, since I have been, I would not want to confirm this
true in my death. Call me, my friend, my good friends: the priest, the
Bachelor Samson Carrasco and Master Nicolás, the barber, I want
confess and make my will.
But the niece was excused from this work with the entrance of the three.
Don Quixote hardly saw them when he said:
-Give me good news, good gentlemen, that I am no longer Don Quixote de la
Mancha, but Alonso Quijano, whom my customs made me famous as
Well. I am already an enemy of Amadís de Gaula and of all the infinite group of
his lineage, all the profane stories of the errant are already hateful to me
cavalry, I already know my folly and the danger in which they put me
read, already, by the mercy of God, teaching in his own head, the
abominate.
When all three heard him say this, they doubtless believed that some new
Insanity had taken him. And Samson said to him:
--Now, Mr. Don Quixote, we have news that the
Mrs. Dulcinea, does your grace come out with that? And now that we are so far
itch to be shepherds, to spend life singing, like princes,
Will your mercy become a hermit? Street, for the life of you, come to your senses, and
stop telling stories.
"Those up to here," replied Don Quixote, "who have been true to me."
damage, my death will return them, with the help of heaven, for my benefit. Me,
Gentlemen, I feel that I am dying in a hurry; set teasing apart, and
bring me a confessor to confess and a scribe to do my
testament, that in such trances as this man is not to mock with
the soul; And so, I beg that, while the priest confesses to me, they go
by the clerk.
They looked at each other, amazed at Don Quixote's reasons, and although
in doubt, they wanted to believe him; and one of the signs where they conjectured was
dying was having gone so easily from mad to sane, because
the reasons already said added many others so well said, so Christian and
with so much concert, that he completely came to remove the doubt, and to believe that
he was sane.
The priest made the people leave, and he was left alone with him, and confessed to him.
The bachelor went for the clerk, and from then on he returned with him and with
Sancho Panza; which Sancho, who already knew from the bachelor's news in what
state was his lord, finding the mistress and niece weeping, began
to pout and shed tears. The confession ended, and the
cure, saying:
-He is truly dying, and Alonso Quijano the
Well; Well we can go in to make your will.
These news gave a terrible push to the eyes pregnant with mistress, niece
and Sancho Panza, his good squire, in such a way that he made them burst
the tears from the eyes and a thousand deep sighs from the chest; because,
truly, as has once been said, insofar as Don Quixote was
Alonso Quijano el Bueno, simply, and while he was Don Quixote de la
Mancha, was always in a peaceful condition and pleasant treatment, and for this reason
He was not only well loved by those in his house, but by all those who
they knew.
The clerk entered with the others, and, having made the head of the
testament and ordered his soul Don Quixote, with all those
Christian circumstances that are required, reaching the mandates, he said:
-Item, it is my will that of certain monies that Sancho Panza, whom in
my madness I made my squire, has, what, because there has been between him and me
certain accounts, and give and take, I want you not to take charge of them,
nor is any account required of him, but if there are any left over, after having
paid what I owe him, the rest is his, which will be very little, and good
profit make you; and, if, as I was crazy, I was part to give him the
government of the island, could now, being sane, give him that of a kingdom,
it was given to him, because the simplicity of his condition and fidelity of his treatment
deserves.
And, turning to Sancho, he said:
-Forgive me, friend, for the occasion that I have given you to seem crazy like me,
making you fall into the error in which I have fallen, that there was and is
knights errant in the world.
-Oh! answered Sancho, crying, "don't die your grace, my lord,
but take my advice and live many years, because the greatest madness that can
to make a man in this life is to allow oneself to die, without further ado, without
Nobody kills him, nor do other hands finish him off than those of melancholy. Look no
be lazy, but get out of bed, and let's go to the field dressed in
pastors, as we have arranged: perhaps after some bush we will find
Mrs. Dulcinea disenchanted, that there is no more to see. If i know
dies despite being defeated, blame me, saying that for
for having me cinched Rocinante badly they knocked him down; how much more, than yours
mercy will have seen in your chivalry books to be an ordinary thing
some knights knock each other down, and the one who is defeated today will be the winner
morning.
"That's right," said Samson, "and good Sancho Panza is quite right about these
cases.
`` Gentlemen, '' said Don Quixote, `` let us go little by little, for already in the nests of
in the past there are no home birds: I was crazy, and I am already sane; I was don Quixote
de la Mancha, and I am now, as I said, Alonso Quijano el Bueno. Can
with your mercies my repentance and my truth return to the
esteem that was had of me, and continue forward the gentleman clerk.
»Item, I send my entire estate, behind closed doors, to Antonia Quijana, my
niece, who is present, having taken first of the most well stopped
Della what is necessary to fulfill the orders that I leave done; and the
first satisfaction that is made I want it to be to pay the salary that I owe
of the time that my mistress has served me, and more than twenty ducats for a dress.
I leave for my executors the priest and the bachelor Sansón Carrasco,
that are present.
»Item, it is my will that if Antonia Quijana, my niece, wants to marry,
marry a man from whom information you do not know has first been made
what things are chivalric books; and, in case it is found out that it
You know, and with all that, my niece wants to marry him, and she will marry,
lose everything I have sent you, which my executors can distribute in
pious works at his will.
»Item, I beg the said gentlemen my executors that if good luck
trujere to meet the author who say that he composed a story that goes by
there with the title of Second part of the exploits of Don Quixote de la
Mancha, from me ask you, how earnestly it can be, forgive the
occasion that without me thinking about it I gave him to have written so many and so great
nonsense as in it he writes, because I leave this life with scruples of
having given him reason to write them.
With this he closed the will, and, taking a faint, stretched out
long in bed. They were all excited and went to their remedy, and in three
days after he lived from where he made the will, he fainted very quickly.
often. The house was in an uproar; but, nevertheless, the niece ate,
the mistress toasted, and Sancho Panza rejoiced; that this inheriting something
erases or tempers in the heir the memory of the penalty that is the reason he leaves
the dead.
Finally, the last of Don Quixote arrived, after receiving all the
sacraments, and after having abominated with many and effective reasons of
the books of chivalry. The clerk was found present, and said that he never
had read in any chivalric book that some knight errant
would have died in his bed so calmly and as Christian as Don
Quixote; who, amid compassion and the tears of those who were found there,
gave his spirit: I mean he died.
Seeing which the priest, asked the clerk to give him as a testimony as
Alonso Quijano el Bueno, commonly called Don Quixote de la Mancha, had
past this present life and naturally dead; and that the such testimony
asked to remove the occasion of any other author than Cide Hamete Benengeli
falsely resuscitate him, and make endless stories of his exploits.
This end had the Ingenious Hidalgo de la Mancha, whose place he did not want to put
Cide Hamete punctually, for letting all the villas and places of the
Mancha would contend with each other to be patronized and considered their own, as
they contended the seven cities of Greece for Homer.
Stop putting here the cries of Sancho, Don Quixote's niece and mistress,
the new epitaphs of his grave, although Sansón Carrasco put this one:
The strong Hidalgo lies here
that to such extreme it arrived
of brave, that is warned
that death did not triumph
of his life with his death.
He had the whole world in little;
it was the scarecrow and the coconut
of the world, at such a juncture,
that credited his fortune
die sane and live mad.
And the prudent Cide Hamete said to his pen:
-Here you will stay, hanging on this rack and this wire thread, I don't know if
well cut or badly cut my peñola, where you will live for long centuries, if
Presumptuous and mischievous historians will not pick you up to desecrate you.
But, before they come to you, you can warn them, and tell them at best
so you could:
'' Tate, tate, fuckers!
Let none be touched;
because it is printed, good king,
for me it was saved.
Don Quixote was born for me alone, and I for him; he knew how to act and I knew how to write;
the two of us are alone together, in spite and in spite of the pretended writer and
tordesillesque who dared, or has to dare, to write with a
coarse ostrich and ill-prepared the exploits of my brave knight,
because it is not a burden on your shoulders or a matter of your cold wit; to
who will you warn, if you ever get to know him, to let him rest in the
bury the tired and already rotten bones of Don Quixote, and do not want him
to bring, against all the fueros of death, to Old Castile,
making him come out of the pit where he really and truly lies lying on
long to long, unable to make the third day and new start; that,
to make fun of so many as did so many errant knights, it is enough
the two that he did, so much to the pleasure and approval of the people whose news
They arrived, in these as well as in the strange kingdoms. '' And with this you will comply
with your Christian profession, advising well those who love you badly, and I
I will be satisfied and proud to have been the first to enjoy the fruit of
his writings entirely, as he wished, since my wish was none other than
to abhor the feigned and absurd
stories from the books of chivalry, which, for those of my true gift
Quixote, they are already stumbling, and they have to fall completely, without a doubt. Voucher.
The end